THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK 



The Man 
in the 
Iron Mask 



BY 

Tighe Hopkins 

AUTHOR OF 

"The Silent Gate: A Voyage into Prison," 
"An Idler in Old France," "The Dungeons of Old Paris, 
"Lady Bonnie's Experiment," 
etc. 



ILLUSTRATED 




LONDON 

HURST AND BLACKETT, LIMITED 

13 GREAT MARLBOROUGH STREET 
1901 

All rights reserved 



PROLOGUE. 

"" Tell me, I pray thee, thy name," cried Jacob, 
wrestling with the dark adversary at Peniel. So 
have successive generations of writers striven with 
that plaguy ghost of history, the Man in the 
Iron Mask, and have vainly entreated his name. 
But it has at last been spoken. The mask has 
dropped from him, behind which he lurked, it seemed, 
impregnably. 

The solution of this diplomatic mystery of two 
centuries, the u ultimate dim Thule " of so many 
speculations, brings forward no new appellant. It 
disposes finally of a host of pretenders (whose claims, 
however, were for the most part quite abandoned in 
the nineteenth century), but it seeks the tragic honours 
of the mask for no fresh candidate. This may be 
a disappointment to some, for what is most fabulous 
in this history has at least been richest in dramatic 
surprises ; but to others, and especially to those 
who have followed the progress of research in 
France, and who are not unacquainted with the 
earliest true surmises on the subject, it will be 
rather gratifying to discover in the victim of Louis 
XIV.'s vengeance that Mattioli who was first put 
forward a hundred and thirty years ago — whose 
pretensions to the mask have been canvassed, de- 



viii PROLOGUE. 

bated, approved, assailed, rejected, renewed, and are 
now reduced to demonstration. 

History has allowed a long innings to guess- 
work, tradition, and invention in all that has con- 
cerned the Man in the Iron Mask. But the truth 
is that she has been ready to come into her own, 
to yield up the secret of the Mask, almost any 
time since the opening of the century. The right 
kind of research, and the dogged patience which 
nothing but Q. E. D. will satisfy : so much she 
asked in payment. The unlocking of Archives has 
left few problems of history unresolved ; and when, 
after the Revolution, those curious documents were 
disclosed which Louis, his ministers, his ambassadors, 
and his gaolers had penned in full security, it was 
certain that the true tale of the Masked Man must 
some day get the benefit of print. Louis XIV. 
had his revenge of Mattioli. History has had hers 
of Louis XIV. I cannot think that the story misses 
much in human interest by the elimination of the 
large element of fable ; but the fact remains that 
to a reader of old French history it presents no 
extraordinary feature. The mask itself excepted 
(and the unimportant character of that too celebrated 
disguise is hereafter shown), the fate of Mattioli 
was neither exceptional nor uncommon. It accorded, 
if not entirely with French jurisprudence, at all events 
with the administration of French justice. It was 
of a piece with the system under which political 
and other offenders always might be, and usually 
were, dealt with : arbitrary arrest, arbitrary im- 
prisonment, and arbitrary punishment, with or with- 



PROLOGUE. ix 

out the form of trial by a court, packed as Richelieu 
generally packed his, to ensure conviction. Trial 
and sentence were both dispensed with in Mattioli's 
case ; but in the days of the " bon plaisir royal et 
ministeriel," which were long before and long after 
the days of Richelieu, those formalities were easily 
forgone. So lightly were subjects of all degrees 
imprisoned under the monarchy, and so readily for- 
gotten in prison, that when a prisoner died after 
years of captivity, the very Minister by whose order 
he had been confined, and who had been informed 
of his demise, would often request to be told the 
reason of his detention. The close of the nineteenth 
century has shown us that justice in France can 
still be a thing of very small security to a prisoner 
at the bar ; and the epoch under consideration in 
this volume begins in the last quarter of the seven- 
teenth century. That a needy and obscure Italian 
diplomat and adventurer, having tricked, flouted, and 
infuriated a sovereign of the temper of Louis XIV., 
should end his days in the Bastille, is not a matter 
to excite even the most trifling degree of wonder. 
Still, the documents to be offered to the reader 
present, with some new lights, a remarkable picture 
of more than one phase of imprisonment under 
the old regime ; and in Saint-Mars we have the 
typical State gaoler of the age, incorruptibly faithful 
to his charge, inflexible almost to cruelty, callous 
to the sufferings of his prisoners, and in his 
private aspect a miser growing richer and richer at 
the expense both of the prisoners and of the 
public treasury. 



x PROLOGUE. 

The credit of the identification of Mattioli with 
the Mask belongs, as one thinks it should belong, to 
France. The beginnings of what constitute history 
on this subject — history more or less exact at the 
outset — are set forth in the Introduction, and more 
minutely in the second part of the volume. Delort, 
whose Histoire de V Homme au Masque de Fer is 
seventy-five years old, was the first to publish a 
really useful collection of documents. Elsewhere I 
have explained how, owing to the incompleteness of 
the series he had access to, his system came to 
grief. Forty-five years later appeared Marius Topin's 
L Homme au Masque de Fer, which is still as a 
whole the best and most complete narrative extant 
But even Topin left something undone ; and his 
proof is not absolute. His is the merit, nevertheless, 
of having first spread the light upon the whole field 
of enquiry ; and he it was who brought the case for 
Mattioli triumphantly to the front again, when the 
one signal error of Delort and his contemporaries 
seemed to have left it for ever in uncertainty. Had 
the investigation ceased with Topin, an impartial critic 
of his work might well have decided that unless and 
until this hypothesis were completely overset, Mattioli 
should be received as the Man in the Iron Mask. 
The crowning proof, decisive and irrefutable, might be 
to seek ; but testimony and inference alike fastened 
the mask upon Mattioli. This hypothesis has not 
been overset. It has been carried further, and con- 
firmed. The solution of M. Frantz Funck-Brentano, 
ratified by the .common assent of scholars in France, 
has satisfied every doubt. Scarcely glancing at the 



PROLOGUE. xi 

history of the affair, summarising all in a few pages 
of irresistible and translucent argument, he has laid 
the great enigma bare.* 

There is a Legend of the Iron Mask, and there 
is a History of the Iron Mask. Of the Legend, 
only a small portion (and that, perhaps, the most 
ridiculous), is known to the generation of to-day : 
with the History, the detail of it, this generation is 
almost of necessity unfamiliar, since no volume has 
yet embraced the whole. Legend and History are 
here brought together and contrasted. The best 
and the most foolish stand side by side ; the incredible 
transmutations of the Legend, and the precise facts 
of the true and rather simple History. A certain 
political transaction, not of the highest importance, 
nor of the most unusual kind, took place two hundred 
years ago in France. Out of this transaction has 
arisen the most extraordinary fable of modern times. 
But truth has done her tardy office ; and the moral, 
somewhat worn, speaks for itself. 

*I refer to the chapter, " L' Homme au Masque de Fer," in 
M. Funck-Brentano's Ltgendes et Archives de la Bastille, Paris : 
Hachette et Cie., 1898. Second edition 1899. Crowned by the French 
Academy. An excellent translation from the pen of Mr. George 
Maidment has since been published by Messrs. Downey and Co. 



CONTENTS 



PROLOGUE. 
Introduction. — The Sphinx of French History 3 

PART I.— THE MAN IN THE MOON. 
CHAPTER I. 

THE DEATH OF VERMANDOIS. 
Points worth Remembering — Sources of the Legend — "A Con- 
tribution to the History of Persia " — A " Persian " Romance 
of the Court of Louis XIV. — Louise de la Valliere — The 
Count of Vermandois — The anonymous Romance examined — 
Vermandois at the Siege of Courtrai — His Sickness and in- 
contestable Death — Burial at Arras — Vermandois not the Man 
in the Iron Mask . . . 27 

CHAPTER II. 

THE ELDER BROTHER AND THE TWIN. 
Branches of this System — Developments under the First Empire 
—Baron de Gleichen — Louis XIV. "a mere bastard" — A 
Discovery missed by Dumas — Voltaire and the Elder Brother 
— This Version perishes with the Revolution — Queen and 
Cardinal — Absurdities of Voltaire's Story — Soulavie and the 
Twin — Soulavie's Supporters — Choice of Dates ... 48 

CHAPTER III. 

THE INFATUATION OF BUCKINGHAM. 
Buckingham at the Court of Louis XIII. — Paris amazed at his 
Prodigality — A Retinue of six or seven hundred Persons — 
Buckingham falls in love with Anne of Austria — Anne never 
alone with him — Amiens — Buckingham's declaration — Amiens 
again — The Scene in the Queen's chamber — Anne sees Buck- 
ingham for the last time — Marie de Medici's statement to 
Louis XIII. — Not a vestige of Proof . . . . . 71 

CHAPTER IV. 

THE ACQUITTAL OF THE QUEEN. 
Early days of Anne of Austria and Louis XIII. — The Girl's en- 
thusiasm and the Boy's indifference— The Marriage — "almost 
a question of State " — Richelieu and the young Queen — Illness 
of Louis XIII. in 1630 — Reconciliation — Birth of Louis XIV. 
— Ceremony and precautions at the birth of a Child of France 
— What of the Twin ? — Soulavie's story examined in Detail — 
Louvois's visit to the Mask disproved — The Silver Dish and 
the Linen Shirt — History repeats that "the Iron Mask was 
not a son of Anne of Austria " . . . . . .86 



CONTENTS. xiii 

CHAPTER V. 

THE EXPIATION OF MONMOUTH. 
Character of Monmouth — His conduct at Sedgemoor — In the 
presence of James II. — The System which makes Monmouth 
the Man in the Iron Mask— Extraordinary character of Saint- 
Foix's "proofs" — From the Cafe Procope to the boudoir 
of the Duchess of Portsmouth — Execution and Burial of 
Monmouth . . . 114 

CHAPTER VI. 

"the king of the markets." 

The systcme Beaufort is the especial snare of age — Lenglet- 
Dufresnoy, Lagrange -Chancel, and Anquetil — Beaufort and 
Monmouth — Beaufort a Lumpkin at Court but a Leader in 
the Field — The market people dub him their King — Beau- 
fort appointed Admiral — His change of front — Lenglet-Dufres- 
noy's theory — The siege of Candia — Panic and rout of the 
French — Beaufort missing — The Dates — Was the Man in the 
Mask a Nonogenarian ? 139 

CHAPTER VII. 

THE TRAGEDY OF NICOLAS FOUQUET. 
Bibliophile Jacob makes Fouquet the Masked Man — An earlier 

XXX 

conjecture— "64, 389,ooo Ke ^ adiou "— The author of this jest 

unknown — The fable revived by Lacroix — Louis XIV. re- 
solves upon the overthrow of Fouquet — His arrest at Nantes 
in 1 66 1 — A special Court formed to try him — A " Seventeenth 
Century Warren Hastings affair" — The Judges in favour of 
banishment — Louis's decree of perpetual imprisonment — Sup- 
position on which Lacroix's hypothesis rests — Fouquet in the 
dungeon of Pignerol — Gradual improvement in his lot — His 
wife and family allowed to visit and stay with him — Fouquet's' 
death of apoplexy, March 23rd, 1680 — Impossibility of agree- 
ing with Lacroix — Theories of Ravaisson, Loiseleur, and lung 
— "Oblivion has looked upon them all " . . . .158 

PART II.— THE MAN IN THE MASK. 
CHAPTER I. 

THE INTRIGUE FOR CASALE. 
Italian policy of Richelieu— Gradually abandoned by Louis 
XIV.— The " Military diplomacy " of Louvois— Character 
and situation of Charles IV. , Duke of Mantua— Casale— Louis 
covets this Stronghold — Intrigue begun in 1676 — Abbe 
d'Estrades— Ercole Antonio Mattioli— D'Estrades employs 
Giuliani to sound Mattioli 181 



xiv CONTENTS. 



CHAPTER II. 

THE RIPENING PLOT. 
The Situation — D'Estrades to Louis XIV. — Mattioli selected to 
conduct the affair — He wins the Duke of Mantua's consent to 
the sale of Casale — The Duke ambitious of a military com- 
mand under Louis — Mattioli to Louis — Louis to Mattioli — 
Louis to send an army into Italy — 100,000 crowns to be paid 
for Casale — Louis's conditions — Everything agreed to — 
Charles in a hurry to conclude the affair — Midnight conference 
between Charles and d'Estrades — Mattioli to go to Paris . 192 

CHAPTER III. 

THE TREASON OF COUNT MATTIOLI. 
Delays are now upon the French side — Mattioli 's journey post- 
poned — D'Estrades precedes him to France — Mattioli ill — 
Off at last — The Treaty — Mattioli has audience of Louis — 
Preparations on the Frontier — Louis to Charles of Mantua — 
The French impatient while the Italians begin to lag — Alarms 
— D'Asfeld seized by the Governor of Milan — Mattioli sus- 
pected — D'Estrades to Mattioli — Mattioli betrays the plot . 206 

CHAPTER IV. 

THE VENGEANCE OF " THE MOST GENEROUS " KING. 
Details of Mattioli's treason — His motives ? — Rage at the Court 
of France — How shall Mattioli be dealt with ? — Louis 
sanctions the proposal of d'Estrades — The King's Orders — 
The Abbe's ruse — The rendezvous — Mattioli falls into the 
trap — Is made prisoner by Catinat — Search for the papers — 
The King is avenged — Mattioli given out as dead — His family 227 

CHAPTER V. 

THE DUNGEON OF PIGNEROL. 
Pignerol in the 17th century — Saint-Mars : the gaoler quintessen- 
tialised — His manner of guarding his prisoners — Mattioli 
becomes the " Sieur Lestang " — Is to be treated "with 
severity" — Temporarily insane — The mad Jacobin — The Ring 
— Fifteen years in Pignerol ....... 250 

CHAPTER VI. 

THE INQUISITION OF JULES LOISELEUR. 
The first attempts to prove that Mattioli was the Man in the 
Mask — Delort — His omissions — Mattioli's fellow-prisoners at 
Pignerol — Saint-Mars receives the command of Exiles — The 
question is, What prisoners went with him ? Who was the 
prisoner who died of dropsy ? — Sudden disappearance of 
Mattioli's name from the correspondence of Louvois and 
Saint-Mars — Deductions of Loiseleur 270 



CONTENTS. 



CHAPTER VII. 

THE MISSING LINK REVEALED BY TOPIN. 
The history of the Mask not contained in any single set of 
documents — Topin takes up the trail — Reasons why Saint- 
Mars should have been afraid to take Mattioli to Casale — 
Was Mattioli at Exiles or not ? — The Missing Link — Mattioli 
was never at Exiles — He re-appears accordingly in the history. 285 

CHAPTER VIII. 

THE PRISONER OF CONSEQUENCE. 
The Isles of Sainte-Marguerite — Arrival there of Saint-Mars in 
1687 — Mattioli still in Pignerol — Saint-Mars at his ease — The 
mandate of February 26th, 1694 — Reasons for the transfer of 
the three prisoners from Pignerol — Louis XIV. falling on his 
evil days — The mysterious journey — After the death of 
Fouquet and the release of Lauzun, Mattioli was the only 
"prisoner of consequence" at Pignerol — New measures of 
precaution — Mattioli, " your ancient prisoner " . . . 296 

CHAPTER IX. 

THE SILVER DISH. 
A Prisoner of State under the Monarchy — Mattioli and other 
State Prisoners — Fable does duty for History — Origins of the 
legends of the Silver Dish and the Linen Shirt — The Guitar — 
Fact and fable in the history of the Iron Mask . . .312 

CHAPTER X. 

THE MASK COMES TO THE BASTILLE. 
Saint-Mars is transferred from Sainte-Marguerite to the Bastille 
— He is to bring with him his "ancient prisoner" — From the 
Isles to Paris— The halt at Palteau — Letter of the grand- 
nephew of Saint-Mars — The entry in Du Junca's Journal — 
The Mask is a mystery, and remains a mystery, to the staff of 
the Bastille — But in the course of time his importance ceases 
— He is displaced in the Bastille by a fortune teller — Effect of 
this upon the Legend — Origin of the story of the whitewashed 
cell — Death and burial of the Mask — His name ; his age — 
"Marchioly," " Marthioli," Mattioli 323 

CHAPTER XL 

Q. E. D. 
The mask itself unimportant in the History — But the mask gives 
rise to the Legend— Mattioli the Man in the Mask ? — The 
proof set out — The Five Prisoners — Louis XV. and Louis XVI. 
— Madame Campan — Charles of Mantua in Paris . . . 350 



ILLUSTRATIONS. 



Buckingham, and his 



The Man in the Iron Mask, according to the Popular 

Legend Frontispiece 

Louis XIV. at the Age of Twenty-eight 

Louis, Comte de Vermandois . 

Louise de la Valliere, as a Carmelite Nun 

Voltaire .... 

Anne of Austria 

George Villiers, first Duke of 
Assassination . 

Anne of Austria and her Sons 

Louis XIII. 

Cardinal Richelieu . 

Cardinal Mazarin 

Charles II. 

The Duke of Monmouth . 

James II. 

The Execution of Monmouth on Tower Hill 

Francis de Vendome 

Nicolas Fouquet 

Louis XIV. . 

Plan of the Town and Citadel at Pignerol to face page 

Plan of the Dungeon of the Citadel at Pignerol 

to face page 

Louvois 231 

Plan of the Chateau of Exiles . . to face page 250 

Panorama of Pignerol (Pinerolo) at the present day . 

Plan of the Fort of Sainte-Marguerite to face page 

The Fort and Chateau of Exiles in 1681 . 

A Corner of the Fort of Exiles .... 

Isle and Portress of Sainte-Marguerite at the present 
day 

Bird's-eye View of the Bastille, 16th and 17th centuries 

Entry in the Register of the Bastille .... 

Entry in the Register of Saint Paul's 

Burial Certificate of the Masked Prisoner . 



3 1 
37 

44 

53 
62 

75 
81 

89 

100 

107 

117 

123 

129 

J 35 
147 
166 

185 
216 

228 



2 59 
264 
279 

287 



2 93 
325 
333 
345 
359 



The f^an in the Iron, fy^ask 



INTRODUCTION. 



INTRODUCTION. 

An arrival at the Bastille, September, 

1698, has been the cause of more 

French discussion than any other event in 

the notable history of that fortress. 

It was Thursday, 18th of the month, and 

three of the afternoon. Armed men on 

horseback surrounded a closed litter, from 

which, when all was sure, descended a meagre, 

silent figure, Saint-Mars, Louis XIV.'s most 

trusted gaoler. He had come to the Bastille 

for the first time, having just received its 

command. The entry of a new governor 

would naturally be of no small moment to 

the staff, whose future lay between his hands ; 

but curiosity was immediately transferred from 

Saint-Mars to the prisoner who accompanied 

1* 



4 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

him. The prisoner's face was hidden by a 
mask of black velvet, a disguise in which no 
one had ever before been brought to the 
Bastille. The unhappy man was already a 
mystery, before even he had set foot within 
the prison which was to be the third and 
last of his long captivity. No one knew 
him, who he was or what he had done 
that Saint-Mars should have him in this ex- 
traordinary keeping. Together, Gaoler and 
Mask, they had traversed France from far 
Provence, travelling always in this secure 
fashion, by silent ways. At the chateau 
and domain of Palteau, a property of Saint- 
Mars, a halt had been made ; and the 
peasants of the estate who came out to meet 
their lord preserved and passed on as a 
tradition the memory of that strange visit. 
The mask, once seen, seems to have haunted 
the dullest fancy. In itself it was no way 
remarkable ; a little black velvet mask : what 



THE SPHINX OF FRENCH HISTORY. 5 

affected the mind was the circumstance that 
the person who wore it was a prisoner. 
This was something entirely unwonted. 
The peasants observed that when the table 
was served the prisoner was always kept with 
his back to the window, they noted the pistols 
at the hand of the vigilant Saint-Mars, and 
the two beds ranged together in the sleeping- 
room. 

The officers of the Bastille had been 
apprised, and the King's lieutenant, Du Junca, 
whose careful diary will be opened, had 
prepared for the prisoner " the third room of 
the Bertaudiere tower." 

Five years later, after one day's illness, 
November 19, 1703, this prisoner died in the 
Bastille. His end was so rapid that he did 
not receive the solace of the sacrament ; the 
chaplain " exhorted him a moment before he 
died." As dusk fell on the next afternoon the 
drawbridge was lowered, and a sorry funeral 



6 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

passed out, which took its way to the graveyard 
of the church of St. Paul : behind a rude coffin, 
two turnkeys of the prison. A furtive, per- 
functory burying, scarcely even decent ; into 
his hasty grave, probably by lantern-light, the 
turnkeys unknown lowered the unknown dead, 
and that was the end. On the church's 
register was inscribed the name of Marchioly. 
In the Bastille they had known him as the 
prisoner from Provence. 

This is that mysterious creature, the problem 
of whose identity has bewitched, impassioned, 
and embroiled six generations of enquirers. 
The incontestable facts are these: that in 1698 
Saint-Mars conducted to the Bastille a prisoner 
who died there five years later ; that he was 
known in the Bastille as the prisoner from 
Provence ; that his unique, unhappy memory 
survived his death in the prison, and overran 
the world. These are the simplest data of the 
problem that lies before us. Twenty-four years 



THE SPHINX OF FRENCH HISTORY. 7 

(1679 — 1703) in the obscurity of prison; at 
the end of that period, an obscure, untended 
death-bed, and a hurried and obscure inter- 
ment ; some further years of oblivion, and then 
there arises and steals from that graveyard 
of St. Paul this ghost that shrouds its face, 
intent upon an odd revenge, the torment and 
insoluble conundrum of historian, fabulist, 
novelist, dramatist, essayist and gossip — the 
Sphinx of French history : the Man in the 
Iron Mask. 

The sole question to resolve is : Whose 
was the face which the mask concealed ? 

The happy acumen of Topin instructs him at 
once as to the false path on which his predeces- 
sors, with scarcely an exception, had set forth. 
Voltaire had said : " What is doubly astonishing 
is this, that when the prisoner in question was 
sent to the Isles of Sainte- Marguerite, there 
did not disappear from Europe any personage 
of note" The Mask had lain fifteen years 



8 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

in the dungeon of Pignerol before they trans- 
ferred him to Sainte-Marguerite, but Voltaire, 
than whom never a writer has approached this 
theme with so complete a lack of information, 
did not take that fact into account. The 
statement just brought forward stimulated 
and obsessed all minds. Who of note did 
vanish from European scenes between the 
date of Mazarin's death (1661) and 1703 ? 
That must be the way to seek the truth 
about the Iron Mask ! Thus was begun the 
" monstrous brood" of all those theories and 
systems which have darkened counsel on this 
subject. In pieces of sundry sorts, waiting 
to be sifted and joined together ; in official 
despatches, epistles, reports, memoranda ; in 
certain live pages of the Bastille's archives, the 
true history of the Masked Man was lying 
all this while unheeded, unthought of. The 
hunt was elsewhere — anywhere, everywhere 
but where the quarry couched. They were 



THE SPHINX OF FRENCH HISTORY. 9 

all wanting to come upon the track of that 
11 person of importance " who must have 
been thrust out of sight while Louis XIV. 
was on the throne ! Was it a brother of 
Louis ? Was it Vermandois ? Was it 
Monmouth ? Was it Beaufort ? Was it 
Fouquet ? The least resemblance found or 
imagined, the mask was clapped on, and a 
new discovery given to the world. " Never 
an Indian deity," says Paul de Saint- Victor, 
" has undergone so many metempsychoses, 
so many avatars." To one incarnation of the 
Mask succeeds another and another ; system 
topples upon system ; but the Sphinx keeps 
hold on the secret. During thirty years 
(says Topin) Voltaire, Freron, Saint-Foix, 
Lagrange-Chancel and Pere Griffet were 
cutting and slashing one another most 
brilliantly, in a joust in which each adversary 
found it easier to demolish the opinions 
opposed to him than to maintain and win 



io THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

acceptance for his own. In Topin's day 
fifty-two writers, sharing among them twenty- 
five different hypotheses, had essayed to look 
behind the mask, and Vicomte Maurice 
Boutry extends the list to sixty, not embracing 
the legion of anonymous contributors to 
periodicals and dictionaries.* Would the 
problem ever be expounded ? This intermin- 
able series of defeats — system and system 
built up in years and shattered in an hour — 
ended by producing one curious but not 
unnatural result. Since no one could identify 
the Mask, might it not be that the Mask 
had never lived ? Here was perhaps some 
prodigious myth, and nothing more. Critics 
less sceptical, but despairing of the truth, 
averred the question beyond human ken. 

* In how many works on the Bastille there is mention of the Man 
in the Iron Mask, I cannot pretend to say. The library of the 
British Museum contains 40,000 treatises on this famous dungeon of 
pre-Revolutionary Paris. Thus, reading at the impossible rate of 
one a day, it would take alx>ve a hundred years to exhaust the 
collection. 



THE SPHINX OF FRENCH HISTORY, n 

" The history of the Iron Mask," says 
Michelet, " will probably remain for all time 
in obscurity." And Henri Martin : " History 
is debarred from giving judgment on what 
will never pass beyond the confines of con- 
jecture." 

But the curiosity of the world has never 
been appeased. Irritated, checked, baffled, 
and a hundred times defeated, it has come 
again to the quest. The itch spread far ; 
England, Germany, and Italy helped France 
to confuse the issue, to draw the mask a little 
tighter over those inscrutable features. 

A secret well kept during many years is 
greatly liable to distortion when it begins at 
last to emerge from the comfortable dark of 
legend and tradition. Indeed, it may become 
twenty or more dissimilar histories before it 
has been properly divulged. At one era and 
another the secret of the Iron Mask has been 
five-and-twenty secrets at the very least. In 



12 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

the lifetime of Louis XIV. it was preserved with 
a cunning and fastness scarcely to be believed. 
Was ever gaoler so mum as Saint-Mars ? 
That mute, uneasy shadow, perpetually plagued 
by fears for the safety of his prisoners, now 
with an eye at the key-hole and now crouched 
among the branches of a tree to spy unseen, 
never in four-and-twenty years gave up the 
secret which he held inviolable by order of 
the King. In the fifteen years the prisoner 
was captive at Pignerol, in the four years 
he lay at the Isles, in the five that brought 
his tragedy to a term in the Bastille, no sub- 
ordinate officer of either place had learned so 
much as his name. From Du Junca's journal 
we shall see presently that even the King's 
lieutenant got it by mere hazard after the 
prisoner's death. And the Court was not 
better informed than the Bastille. The 
omniscient Saint-Simon, the Greville of France, 
had never an inkling of the matter. That 



THF SPHINX OF FRENCH HISTORY. 13 

unbridled gossip, the Princess Palatine, who 
spent half the day at her desk inditing scandal 
to her family and friends abroad, was com- 
pletely wide of the mark.* Supposed at one 
time to rank among the prerogatives of the 
crown, history has proved that this was not 
the case with the sombre secret of the mask. 
Madame Campan will show us that it was 
unknown to Louis XVI. Napoleon expressed 
a lively regret at not being able to satisfy 
his curiosity. Louis-Philippe discussed the 
problem frequently, but confessed his ignorance 
of the solution ; and if certain other sovereigns 
pretended to the knowledge, the contradictions 
of their statements sanction the inference that 
they were not more correctly instructed. f 

* "I have just learned," writes Madame from Versailles, October 
22, 171 1, who was the masked man who died in the Bastille. His 
wearing a mask was not due to cruelty. He was an English lord whc 
had been mixed up in the affair of the Duke of Berwick (natural son 
of James II.) against King William. He died there so that the King 
might never know what became of him." 

t Topin. 



t 4 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

Here, then, indeed was a Secret of the State 
consummately preserved, not only during, but 
after, the lifetime of the monarch whose inte- 
rest it was to safeguard it. " See that no one 
knows what becomes of this man" * Such was 
the private peremptory order of Louis XIV. 
to his minister, Abbe d'Estrades ; and he was 
obeyed. Clearly, therefore, this would be a 
hard secret to come at, until the sole right 
method — the search for, and disentombing 
of, the documents — was chanced upon. 

But both the writers on this mystery and 
their readers, in England as in France, have 
displayed, for the most part, a rather singular 
perversity. It would be fastidious, if not 
altogether idle, at this day to make inquest on 
the motives which led so many authors of 
erudition, ingenuity, and exceeding patience to 
beguile the public with the notion that they 
had found beneath the mask the features 

* " II faudra que personne tie sfac/ie ce que cet homme sera devenu." 
Louis XIV. to d'Estrades : April 28th, 1679. 



THE SPHINX OF FRENCH HISTORY. 15 

of Vermandois, or Monmouth, or Beaufort, or 
the Armenian patriarch Avedick — nay, even 
of Moliere himself! Assuredly the scandal- 
hunters were not for nothing in this affair, 
and no doubt some private vengeances were 
served by certain theories which offered not 
the veriest semblance of reality.* In some 
other instances, when mere malignity has not 
motived the enquiry, the prepossessions of 
authors with fixed ideas have lured them far, 
and left them, in the end, the victims of 
irreducible dilemmas. A conjecture is reared 
into a system ; such facts as favour it are 
adopted as readily as the facts in opposition 
are rejected. When the list of famous men 
comprised within the historical period is ex- 
hausted, the period is audaciously extended ; 

* Thus, there were those who pretended to discover under the 
mask a son of the Duchess Henrietta of Orleans and Louis XIV. ; 
a son of Henrietta of Orleans and the Comte de Guiche ; a son of 
Christine of Sweden and Monaldeschi ; a son of Marie-Therese 
(wife of Louis XIV. ) and the negro servitor whom she had brought 
from Spain ; a son of Cromwell, etc. 



1 6 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

and a complacent public has been asked to 
accept some effigy of an Iron Mask alive in 
1706, three years after the attested death of 
the prisoner of Saint-Mars. Avedick, the 
Armenian patriarch, whose claims to the mask 
were advocated by the Chevalier de Taules, 
was not carried off until 1706. M. Emile 
Burgaud fixed on General Vivien Labbe de 
Bulonde ; but " M. Geoffroy de Grandmaison 
published in the Univers of January 9, 1895, 
two receipts signed by General de Bulonde, 
one in 1699, when the Masked Man was in 
rigorous isolation in the Bastille ; the other 
in 1705, when he had been two years dead."* 
It would seem, indeed, that scarcely an 
author has come quite single-minded to this 
task. There need be no general implication 
of bad faith ; it is sufficient to suggest that 
the majority of these defenders of systems 
not defensible were anxious first to get their 

# Funck-Brentano. 



THE SPHINX OF FRENCH HISTORY. 17 

literary profit out of a topic of perennial in- 
terest, and unwilling afterwards to admit the 
truth that must undo them. It is not, how- 
ever, in this way that things are proved, this 
is not the way of science ; and perhaps no sub- 
ject perplexing to history has remained longer 
in doubt from the common disregard of the 
just historical method. 

But the offence in chief, the mischief of 
the fable which has run throughout the world 
to the hurt of a woman and a queen, should 
be attached. It attaches immediately to 
Voltaire. Here, indeed, we must conclude, 
was malice prepense. First he prepares his 
audience by an attractive hint or two ; retires 
then, and watches the effect. Nothing could 
be better ; we are all agog : as much more of 
this as you please. So, without the least em- 
barrassment on the author's part, the horrid 
hoax is launched, and starts forthwith upon 
its travels. It was a piece of quite un- 



1 8 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

scrupulous sensationalism, skilfully imagined, 
but — as there will be occasion to show — 
elaborated with little art, and with less than 
no regard for consistency. None the less, 
there were in it all the elements of an abiding 
popularity ; it had the romantic quality, it was 
royally scandalous, it disclosed a seeming 
State secret of capital significance, it soiled 
the honour of a queen : for a hundred and 
fifty years it has represented to the many the 
whole entrancing truth of the Man in the 
Iron Mask. But the proofs ? Ah ! there, 
indeed, we are speedily confounded. M. Vol- 
taire apparently forgot that history, sooner or 
later, would be wanting to know what he 
meant by it — this titillating fable of her 
Majesty's amours and the semi-royal child 
resulting from them, who was to end his days 
as the prisoner of the mask. On Voltaire's 
part not an ounce of real proof was ever 
offered, and the researches of scholars have 



THE SPHINX OF FRENCH HISTORY. 19 

clearly demonstrated that none ever could 
have been offered, since none was ever in 
existence. Of all the systems of the mask 
this one is the most denuded of testimony. 
The utmost rigour of investigation has failed 
to shew that Anne of Austria had any part in 
the affair of the Iron Mask ; on the other 
hand, it has shewn conclusively that she had 
none. At the time it was begun the queen 
had been dead nearly twelve years. Let it be 
added that this baseless hypothesis has "long 
been abandoned. ¦ The last writers who ad- 
hered to it date from the revolutionary 
period." * 

But the public partiality for Voltaire's egre- 
gious version is perhaps not wonderful. A 
king's brother in the mask — it was really a 
very fine notion ! The accessories, too, were 

* Funck-Brentano. — In fiction, the system which is an extension 
of Voltaire's has enjoyed, of course, the prepotent championship of 
Dumas, in the novel beloved of Louis Stevenson, The Vicomte de 
Bragelonne. 



2o THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

all so captivating to the fancy. If that damn- 
ing resemblance to Louis XIV. existed (a pity 
Voltaire could not contrive to prove it ! ), the 
necessity for the mask is patent ; and pray let 
it be, not the "light Venetian mask" of velvet 
which in reality it was, and which was of uni- 
versal use among the upper classes in Italy, 
but the right melodramatic article, the " iron 
mask " with the steel chinpiece, a mediaeval 
instrument of torture, which could not have 
been borne for a week ; and let the poor High- 
ness wear this day and night for four-and-twenty 
years.* This was something like romance! 

Nor was this all. Who parts willingly with 
the other adjuncts which time has grouped 

* I have never seen the old-fashioned play on the subject of i the 
Mask, which, no longer known to London, is still faring up and down 
the country ; a version possibly of the once-admired piece, Le Masque 
de fer, by Fournier and Arnould, first given at the Paris Odeon in 
1 83 1. But, cycling through Canterbury in the falling light of an 
October afternoon, I observed the placid thoroughfares of that city 
aflame with pictures of the drama. Here was the Man in the Iron 
Mask with a vengeance. The mask itself as depicted on the posters 
had the appearance of a small boiler. 



THE SPHINX OF FRENCH HISTORY. 21 

about the indomitable legend ? — the " bound- 
less deference" shown to the prisoner, Saint- 
Mars never seating himself in his presence, 
addressing him " with bared head," serving 
him with his own hands on silver plate, and 
supplying him with "the most luxurious 
raiment his fancy could desire " ; the notable 
tale of the silver dish which the prisoner 
flings out of window, after carving a message 
on it with a knife, and which nearly costs his 
life to the fisherman who restores it ; or the 
version of Pere Papon, in which a shirt of fine 
linen, with a letter written on the inside, takes 
the place of the dish : who yields up willingly 
these lively figments, long as they have gone 
by the board ? 

It is enough to recall the reception, cool in 
some quarters and in others hostile, which those 
scholars met with who first untied the knot. 
Few problems of history have held so many 
vested interests, and no vested interests in a 



22 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

problem of history have been more tenaciously 
fought for. What innumerable pens, French 
and alien, were mortgaged in this affair ! Baron 
Heiss's affirmation, the first true note upon 
the Mask in French, was received "with 
indifference." * 

Voltaire, an old man now and jealous high 
priest of his own inspired myth, was moved to 
peevishness. "Why," he cries, "they have 
even given him an Italian name!" Heiss's 
epistle was merely in the nature of a sugges- 
tion, but at last the right word had been uttered. 
The unravelling remained to do, however, and 
for a long time it was a task not less thankless 
than laborious : the true heir was no Prince of 
the blood, and there was no investing him with 
fine linen or feeding him on silver dishes. 
Voltaire's pretender, "young, and with features 
of rare nobility and beauty" (though.no one 
ever saw them !) was still the fairy hero of the 

*Vte. Maurice Boutry. 



THE SPHINX OF FRENCH HISTORY. 23 

multitude. Came Topin finally, and the fairy 
prince got his coup de grace. Not talent and 
not genius will ever again make a Canterbury 
Tale of the Man in the Iron Mask. History 
lighted her lamp at Topin's hands, and was 
avenged. M. Funck-Brentano has shown con- 
clusively that Topin was right, and has 
furnished the proofs that were still to seek. 
But will the facts uproot the fable ? In 
historical circles in France, discussion on the 
question of the Mask is at an end, but, for 
the general public, there are, as M. Sardou 
says, " The guides, the showmen to reckon 
with — those faithful guardians of legends, 
whose propaganda is more aggressive than 
that of scholars."* And among ourselves the 

* Victorien Sardou. — Preface to Funck-Brentano. M. Sardou adds : 
"When you reflect that every day, at the Isles of Sainte-Marguerite, 
the masked man's cell is exhibited to visitors by a good woman who 
retails all the traditional fables about the luxurious life of the prisoner, 
his lace, his plate, and the attentions shown him by Saint-Mars, you 
will agree that a struggle with this daily discourse would be hopeless. 
And you would not come off with a whole skin ! " — Ibid. 



24 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

Voltaire tractate is still occasionally reprinted ; 
Dumas is very much alive ; and audiences at 
country theatres are perennially regaled with 
the spectacle of the suffering prince, his 
head encased in an iron boiler. 

Meanwhile, for those who will read it, the 
true tale as revealed by history is not bereft 
of interest or romance. The treason of the 
rash Italian, who flouted Louis the Magnificent 
in the face of Europe, and was so terribly 
despoiled for the same, needed only its Dumas, 
or our own dear Stevenson, to be borne to the 
rim of the universe. In any event, it seems 
good to speed the Man in the Moon, and admit 
in his place the corporeal Man in the Mask. 



PART I. 

THE MAN IN THE MOON. 



27 



CHAPTER I. 

It will be of profit to remember : — 

The Death 

of i. That the mysterious prisoner 

Vennandols. wag nQ myth 

2. That, while quite unknown, legend was 
already busy with him before his death. 

3. That the hypotheses of the 18th century 
are without the support of history. 

4. That since, from the era of the French 
Revolution, access to the Archives became 
possible, these hypotheses have been one by 
one abandoned. 

5. That the expression " iron mask " — 
" masque de fer " — does not occur in any 
official document : it is a " mask," a " velvet 
mask," or a " black velvet mask." 

6. That the tradition of a royal secret, passed 
on from king to king, is disproved. 



28 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

7. That the Legend owes everything to the 
imagination of men of letters, that it is en- 
tirely at variance with facts, and that it has 
held its ground by reason mainly of the 
prevailing voice of Voltaire, and the enduring 
fascination of Dumas. 

We can proceed now to determine the source 
and origin of the Legend. In 1745 there 
appeared at Amsterdam, under the auspices of 
the Compagnie des libr aires assoctes, a small 
romance entitled " A Contribution to the 
History of Persia."* It was published anony- 
mously, and the authorship has remained a 
secret. Several critics have assigned it (" not 
without some reason," says M. Funck-Bretano) 
to Madame de Vieux-Maisons ; others to the 
Due de Nivernais ; and others again to the 
Chevalier de Ressegnier, an officer in the 
Guards, whom Madame de Pompadour had 
sent to the Bastille. General lung inclines to 

* " Me" moires secrets pour servir h Phistoire de Perse." 



THE DEATH OF VERMANDOIS. 29 

Paul Lacroix's opinion that Voltaire himself 
was the author. The identity of the author 
is, however, quite unimportant. What is of 
interest is, that this slender novel was very- 
soon the talk of France. It said the first public 
word about that hidden prisoner of Saint-Mars 
whose misfortunes were just beginning to 
entrain attention. 

" Cka-Abas" * says the anonymous author, 
" had a legitimate son, Sdphi-Mirza,\ and a 
natural son, Giafer.% The children were 
almost of an age, but their characters agreed 
in nothing. Giafer was never tired of saying 
that the French were greatly to be pitied for 
their subjection to a monarch who had not 
the wit to rule them. These treasonous 
words were carried to Cha-Abas, but the 
father was stronger in him than the king, 
and he could not bring himself to exert his 

* Louis xiv. 

t Louis the Dauphin. 

X Louis de Bourbon, Comte de Vermandois. 



3o THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

authority over a son who had abused his 
tenderness. At last, Giafer so far forgot 
himself as to strike Sephi-Mirza in the face. 
This was at once reported to Cha-Abas, 
who, trembling for the culprit, and willing 
even now to overlook the offence, could not 
but regard it as an attempt against himself 
and his crown ; and, as the affair had scan- 
dalised the court, he could no longer yield to 
the promptings of a father's love. He con- 
strained himself, and summoned the most 
intimate of his courtiers ; showed them his 
grief, and demanded their voice upon the 
matter. For a crime of this magnitude, they 
declared, the laws of the State awarded 
death. What a verdict for the doting father ! 
Then, one of the ministers, more sen- 
sible than the others of the affliction of 
Cka-Abas, proffered a means of punishing 
Giafer without putting him to death. 
•' Let the prince,' said this counsellor, ' be 




*mmmm 



Louis XIV. at the age of Twenty-Eight. 
From an engraving after Le Bran. 



THE DEATH OF VERMANDOIS. 33 

sent to the army which was then on the 
frontiers of Feldran* Shortly after his arrival 
let it be given out that he had sickened of 
the plague, which would be a sure way of 
detaching from him his friends and admirers, 
and, a few days later, let it be announced 
that the malady had carried him off. Then 
whilst, in the presence of the whole army, his 
obsequies should be celebrated in a manner 
befitting his birth, he must be borne away 
by night, and taken secretly to the citadel 
of the Isle of Ormus! f This advice was 
very generally approved, and above all by 
the afflicted father. Persons faithful and 
discreet were chosen for the conduct of the 
affair ; and Giafer, with a splendid retinue, 
set forth for the army. There it fell out 
as the plot had ordered, and while all the 
camp lamented that untimely fate, the unhappy 

* Flanders. 

t Isles of Sainte- Marguerite, 



34 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

prince was hurried by privy ways to the 
Isle of OrmuSy where they delivered him 
into the hands of the governor, whom Cha- 
Abas had commanded that no one should 
ever obtain sight of his prisoner. One 
attendant only, who shared the secret, was 
taken with the prince ; but this man dying 
by the way, the escort slashed his face with 
their poniards that he might not be recog- 
nised, and left him stripped and stark upon 
the road. When Cha-Abas, to reward the 
governor's fidelity, bestowed on him the 
command of the citadel of Ispahan* Giafer 
was removed there. At the Isle of Ormus, 
as in the citadel of Ispahan, he was com- 
pelled to wear a mask when, by reason of 
sickness or for any other cause, it was 
necessary to let him be seen." f 

Such was the story which set all minds 

* The Bastille. 

t Mimoires secrets pour servir h Vhistoire de Perse- 



THE DEATH OF VERMANDOIS. 35 

in France to work upon the enigma of the 
prisoner of Saint-Mars. " No sooner had it 
appeared," says lung, " than the problem of 
the mysterious prisoner became the question 
of the day. Refutations, criticisms, pamphlets, 
letters, memoirs, and ever new solutions 
succeeded one another rapidly from 1750 to 
1790." The " History of Persia" continued 
to be credited even after Voltaire's more 
romantic nonsense had seduced the multitude. 
Let us examine its pretensions. It repre- 
sents, as Topin observes, a kind of com- * 
promise between the impossibility of accepting 
the imaginary hero of Voltaire and the desire 
to see in the Masked Man some person of 
exalted birth. 

In Vermandois we have at all events a live 
man, and the natural son of a King to boot. 
His mother was that beautiful and sympathetic 
Louise de la Valliere who touches us more 
closely than any other of the heroines of 

3* 



36 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

the court of Louis XIV. Yielding with re- 
luctance to the passion of the King, la Valliere 
was no courtesan and no fortune-hunting ad- 
venturess. Strong in her very weakness, 
she subjugated without art or wile the most 
imperious sovereign in Europe, and from the 
torments of a love, ceaselessly combated, she 
passed to the rigors of a penance courageously 
endured for thirty years. Sweetest and most 
captivating figure of the great reign, she has 
engaged the hearts of posterity.* 

The graces of the mother were innate in 
Louis de Bourbon, Count of Vermandois. 
Tall and finely formed, he possessed la Val- 
liere's instinctive gift of pleasing. Kindly and 
generous, he had his own peculiar ways of 
conferring favours, arid the most fastidious 
of men, it was said, could never reject or be 
offended by his benefits. From a child he 
had the love of Louis XIV., who was as proud 

* Topin. 




JL>i ( tt ( otwlra 1/ le iS. o , i {*'&'}. v 

lllillll illlllll 



Louis, Comte de Vermandois. 
From an engraving after Mignard. 



THE DEATH OE VERMANDOIS. 39 

as he was tender of him. In the army, he 
won the officers as completely as he had won 
the common soldiers, and his personal courage 
was of the highest ; with the troops in 
Flanders, on one occasion, he concealed a grave 
malady, that he might not miss his part in 
an attack. As if under the influence of that 
subtle warning which often strikes those whose 
death is to be premature, he seemed eager to 
ensure for his memory the renown of some 
signal act : but his day was too short for glory. 
A posthumous celebrity of a most uncommon 
kind was, however, in store for him. Sixty 
years after his death, it occurred — Heaven 
knows how ! — to the unknown author of these 
Memoires secrets pour servir a Fhistoire de 
Perse to add to the too-brief life of the gra- 
cious Vermandois twenty years of captivity in 
prison, and to render his destiny sadder by 
presenting him as the incognizable victim of 
Louis XIV.'s tyranny. 



4 o THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

What proofs, or failing proofs, what proba- 
bilities does the story carry ? In the 
seventh volume of Mdlle. de Montpensier's 
interminable " Memoirs " there is a definite 
statement that Vermandois was under a cloud 
at court when he set out for the siege of 
Courtrai ; that the King, annoyed about his 
gallantries in the town, and the company the 
young man kept, had banished him from the 
presence. There is no word of a quarrel 
with the Dauphin, or of a blow in the face, 
a scandal which could scarcely have re- 
mained unknown to Mdlle. de Montpensier, 
and one which, since she was no friend to the 
brilliant Vermandois,* she would not have 
scrupled to divulge. As for Vermandois's 
pretended disgrace, and the King's refusal to 
see him, we find that on the earliest rumour of 
his illness at Courtrai, Louis sends word that 

* " I was not sorry for the death of M. de Vermandois," she says 
in this same volume of the Mdmoires. 



THE DEATH OF VERMANDOIS. 41 

he is to be brought back to court as quickly as 
possible, " where he can be surrounded with 
every care."* 

" Is there need," asks Topin, " to insist 
upon the impossibility of admitting that a son 
and heir of Louis XIV. could receive the 
gravest insult in the midst of the court, and 
no allusion be made to the fact by a single 
contemporary writer ? " Further to diminish 
the probability of the tale, the author of the 
Me'moires Secrets shows us in Vermandois, that 
mirror of courteous chivalry, an unmannerly 
and treasonable cub, unable to keep his hands 
from the brother who was one day to be his 
king. Finally, the brothers are described as 
" d pen pres du meme age" whereas there were 
six years between them ; Vermandois at the 
period of this display of ungovernable temper 
being but sixteen, while the Dauphin was 
already the father of the Due de Bourgogne. 

* The King to the Marquis de Montchevreuil, Nov. 4, 1683. 



42 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

The untimely death of Vermandois is a fact 
that cannot be disputed, nor is there in his last 
earthly moments, or in the transport of his 
remains to Arras, where they were interred, 
a circumstance which provokes the faintest 
degree of suspicion. 

It was on the 6th of November, 1683, 
that the young Count took to his bed at 
Courtrai. He had been sickening for 
some days, but would not admit it, so deter- 
mined was he to take part in the attack on 
Menin, " where he gave proofs of the highest 
courage." 

His fever increased rapidly ; on the 12th of 
the month Marshal d'Humieres communicated 
his condition to the minister Louvois ; on the 
13th word was sent to the court. Three days 
later, on the 16th, it is announced* that the 
patient has just received the sacrament, and 

* Archives du ministere de la guerre. De Boufflers a Louvois, 
Cited by Topin. 




Louise de la Valliere, as a Carmelite Nun. 
From an engraving after D. a. Plaats. 



THE DEATH OF VERMANDOIS. 45 

that ton riespere plies que dans sa jeunesse. 
On the second day from this, November 18th, 
the son of la Valliere died of malignant fever 
in the presence of Marshal d'Humieres, the 
Marquis de Montchevreuil, and Lieutenant- 
General Boufflers. " In the camp, distress was 
general. They wept for the good he had 
achieved, and for the promises of greatness 
unfulfilled." Mademoiselle de la Valliere " is 
all day at the foot of her crucifix." 

On the 27th of November, before an im- 
mense and brilliant crowd of witnesses, Ver- 
mandois was laid with pomp in the choir of 
the cathedral church of Arras. By the King's 
command, a requiem mass was said in the 
same place every day during the remainder of 
the year ; and provision was ordered to be 
made for a solemn service, preceded by vigils, 
on the 1 8th of November, each year, "a 
perpetuite." Doles were to be given to the 
poor of Arras on this day, "that they might 



46 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

pray for the soul's welfare of the Comte de 
Vermandois." Up to the year of the Re- 
volution, 1789, all these stipulations of the act 
drawn up with the chapter of the cathedral, in 
the name of Louis XIV., " were scrupulously 
fulfilled." 

To sum up. If the amiable and chivalrous 
Vermandois struck the Dauphin, as the legend 
of the " Contribution to the History of Persia " 
maintains, the proof has not come down to 
us. If for this deed Louis XIV. condemned 
a favourite son to lifelong imprisonment, the 
proof is not less in request. The dispatches 
concerning the successive phases of the illness 
of Vermandois, his death at Courtrai, his burial 
in the cathedral of Arras, are in existence. 
And, as regards Louis XIV. (who held such 
things profoundly sacred), what an awful and 
most impious derision is in that pomp of burial, 
and in those masses celebrated during a 
hundred years, if the coffin in the choir were 



THE DEATH OF VERMANDOIS. 4 7 

tenantless, and Vermandois a living prisoner in 
the dungeon of Pignerol ! 

There is but to add that this version of the 
mystery, adopted by Freron in 1768, and by 
the unknown author of the Histoire du fils dun 
Roi y in 1789, has lain for above a century in 
well-merited neglect. 



48 



CHAPTER II. 

The systeme Vermandois was a choice 

The 

Ewer Brother regale in its way, but a dish more de- 
and lectable was preparing. The Legend 

the Twin. 

was not to be world-famous till it 
had made of the Iron Mask a brother of 
Louis XIV. Of this system there were 
several branches. Thus, the Mask was : — 

i. A son of Anne of Austria and some 
lover undiscovered. 

2. A son of Anne of Austria and the 
Duke of Buckingham. 

3. A son of Anne of Austria and Cardinal 
Mazarin ; 

or 

4. A twin brother of Louis XIV. 



ELDER BROTHER AND THE TWIN. 49 

Later, under the First Empire, there were 
new and very elegant conceits. Taking up 
the theory of the twin brother, the Baron de 
Gleichen had asserted, and had been at pains 
to prove, "that it was the true heir to the 
throne who was put out of sight, to the profit 
of a child of the Queen and the Cardinal. 
Having become masters of the situation on 
the death of the King [Louis XIII.], they 
substituted their son for the Dauphin, the 
substitution being facilitated by a strong 
likeness between the children."* The dire con- 
sequences of this hypothesis strike the eye 
at once : it nullifies in the most absolute 
fashion the legitimacy of all the remaining 
Bourbons. 

After a period of repose in the shades, the 
ghost of the Baron de Gleichen awoke and 
stalked forth into the First Empire, where all 
the talents were probing the dust of the Man 

* Funck-Brentano. 

4 



5 o THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

in the Iron Mask. Here is the contribution of 
the Baron's ghost to the bewildering topic of 
debate. " Louis XIV. had been a mere bastard, 
the child of foreigners. The lawful heir had 
been imprisoned at the Isles of Sainte- 
Marguerite, where he had married the daughter 
of one of his gaolers. Of this marriage a child 
was born, who, as soon as he was weaned, was 
despatched to Corsica, and there entrusted to a 
safe person, as a child coming of ' good stock ' 
— in Italian, Buona-parte. It is from this child 
that the Emperor was directly descended. The 
true claim of Napoleon I. to the throne of 
France established by the Iron Mask ! — How 
came the great Dumas to miss that great 
discovery ? " * 

Note has been made of the suggestion that 
Voltaire was the author of the unsigned 
" Contribution to the History of Persia." He 
affected to treat it in public as an " obscure, 

* Funck-Brentano. 



ELDER BROTHER AND THE TWIN. 51 

ridiculous pamphlet," but he was exceedingly 
quick to appreciate the interest it had aroused. 
Surely that tale of Vermandois and the Dauphin, 
and the fond King who would not slay his son, 
might be improved upon ! Now Voltaire had, 
as Matthew Arnold says of Macaulay, "his 
own heightened and telling way of putting 
things " ; and of that heightened and telling 
way of his there is no more effective illustration 
than the surmise upon the Mask with which he 
witched the world. People have gone on re- 
peating it — not as surmise but as history — even 
to the present day. In how many minds does 
not the mention of the Man in the Iron Mask 
conjure up the image of a brother of the Grand 
Monarque ? This story, nevertheless, is un- 
supported by any document that ever yet was 
vouched for ; not in all the archives of France 
is there one single piece to stay it on ; nor 
will it tally (and this were indispensable) 

with the dates of the changing periods in 

4 # 



52 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

Saint- Mars's career. In a word, from the 
day that the State papers of France became 
available, no seeker of the truth could 
continue his belief in the divination of 
Voltaire : so far as criticism was concerned 
it perished, accordingly, in the cataclysm of 
the Revolution. 

Let us see how adroitly Voltaire went to 
work. In the first edition of his " Age of 
Louis XIV.," published in 1751, he wrote: — 
" Some months after the death of Mazarin, an 
event happened which is without a parallel in 
history. Moreover, and this is not less re- 
markable, the event has been passed over in 
silence by every historian. There was sent 
with the utmost secrecy to the castle of the Isles 
of Sainte-Marguerite, in the Sea of Provence, 
a prisoner unknown, of a stature above the 
average, young, and with features of rare 
nobility and beauty. On the way, the prisoner 
wore a mask, the chinpiece of which was 




• 



Voltaire. 
After De la Tour. 



ELDER BROTHER AND THE TWIN. 55 

furnished with springs of steel, so that he 
could eat without removing it. Order had 
been given to kill him if he ventured to 
uncover. He remained at the Isles until a 
trusted officer, Saint-Mars by name, governor 
of Pignerol, having been appointed in 1690 to 
the command of the Bastille, came to Sainte- 
Marguerite to fetch him, and bore him thence — 
always in his mask — to the Bastille. Before 
his removal, he was seen in the Isle by the 
Marquis de Louvois, who remained standing 
while he spoke to him with a consideration 
savouring of respect. In the Bastille, the 
unknown was as well bestowed as was possible 
in that place, and nothing that he asked for was 
refused him. He had a passion for lace and 
fine linen ; he amused himself with the guitar ; 
and his table was furnished with the best. The 
governor rarely sat down in his presence. 
An old doctor of the Bastille, who had often 
attended this interesting prisoner, said that, 



56 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

although he had examined his tongue and the 
rest of his body, he had never seen his face. 
He was admirably made, said the doctor, and 
his skin was of a brownish tint. He spoke 
charmingly, with a voice of a deeply interesting 
quality; never complaining of his lot, and 
never letting it be guessed who he was. This 
unknown captive died in 1703, and was buried 
by night in the parish of Saint- Paul. What is 
doubly astonishing is this : that when he was 
sent to Sainte- Marguerite there did not dis- 
appear from Europe any personage of note. 
This was he, beyond a doubt, for observe what 
happened within a few days of his arrival 
at the Isle. The governor himself laid the 
prisoner's table, and then withdrew and locked 
the door. One day the prisoner wrote some- 
thing with a knife on a silver plate, and threw 
the plate out of the window towards a boat on 
the shore, almost at the foot of the tower. 
A fisherman, to whom the boat belonged, picked 



ELDER BROTHER AND THE TWIN. 57 

up the plate and carried it to the governor, 
who, surprised beyond measure, asked the 
man : ' Have you read what is written on this 
plate, and has anyone seen it in your hands ? ' 
1 I cannot read,' answered the fisherman ; ' I 
have only just found it, and no one else has 
seen it.' He was detained until the governor 
had made sure that he could not read, and that 
no other person had seen the plate. ' Go,' he 
then said, ' It is well for you that you cannot 
read.'" * 

It will be seen that Voltaire does not say 

* The reader will be interested in comparing with this the version 
which Pere Papon gives in his Histoire Ge'ne'ralede Provence. Here, it will 
be observed, the issue is more tragical. Says Father Papon : "I met 
in the Citadel an officer of the Free Company, aged seventy-nine. He 
told me more than once that a frater of that company saw one day, 
under the prisoner's window, some white thing floating on the water. 
He brought it to shore, and carried it to M. de Saint-Mars. It was a 
shirt of very fine linen, carelessly folded, which the prisoner had com- 
pletely covered with writing. Unfolding it, and reading a few lines, 
M. de Saint-Mars, with an air of great embarrassment, asked the frater 
if he had not had the curiosity to read it himself. The frater declared 
over and over again that he had read nothing ; nevertheless, two days 
later, he was found dead in his bed." 



58 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

as yet who his extraordinary prisoner was. 
" He observed the impression his story had 
produced. Then, growing bolder, he in- 
sinuated in the first edition of the ' Questions 
on the Encyclopaedia' that, if the prisoner 
were masked, it was a precaution taken to 
prevent the recognition of a certain striking 
likeness. He still withheld the name, but 
every ear was straining now for some impos- 
ing revelation." * 

It came at last, in the second edition 
of the " Questions on the Encyclopaedia." 
This time Voltaire, afraid to captain his 
fantasy, took cover behind his publisher. 
The paragraph had better be translated at 
length : — 

" The Iron Mask was without doubt a 
brother, and an elder brother, of Louis XIV., 
whose mother had that taste for fine linen 
with which M. de Voltaire has re-enforced his 

* Funck-Brentano. 



ELDER BROTHER AND THE TWIN. 59 

case.* Reading the contemporary Memoirs in 
which this anecdote of the Queen finds men- 
tion, I had not a doubt that this was her son, a 
conclusion to which various other circumstances 
had already guided me. It is known that 
Louis XIII. had long ceased to share the 
Queen's couch, and that the birth of Louis 
XIV. was the fruit of a happy accident. 
Here, as I believe, is the history of the affair : 
The Queen had come to persuade herself that 
hers alone was the fault which had deprived 
Louis XIII. of an heir. The birth of the 
Iron Mask undeceived her on that point. 
The Cardinal,f to whom she had confided 
her secret, saw where his advantage lay in 
it. He could shape it at once to his own 

*"It was made to appear — although nothing has ever been 
advanced in proof — that the Mask was addicted to the wearing of 
fine linen ; and Anne of Austria, we know, was particularly fond of 
laces and embroideries. But this taste is not exactly confined to 
royal families, and is perhaps a little insufficient to convict a queen of 
adultery." — Vte. Maurice Boutry. 

t Richelieu. 



6o THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

profit and to the profit of the State. Satisfied, 
by what had occurred, that the Queen was 
able to give children to France, he arranged 
to bring her Majesty and the King together. 
But both Queen and Cardinal being equally 
persuaded of the necessity of concealing from 
Louis XIII. the existence of the Iron Mask, 
they had the child removed in secret. 
Louis XIV. remained in ignorance of the 
matter until after the death of Cardinal 
Mazarin. Then, and not till then, did it 
come to the knowledge of the King that 
he had a brother living, an elder brother, more- 
over, whom his mother could not possibly 
disown, and in whom some signal likeness 
might not improbably declare his origin. 
Reflecting that this Prince, born in wedlock, 
could not, without the gravest consequences 
and most dire scandal, be pronounced illegiti- 
mate after the decease of Louis XIII., 
Louis XIV. could have fallen on no measure 




Anne of Austria. 



ELDER BROTHER AND THE TWIN. 63 

wiser or more just than the one which he 
adopted ; and that measure, in addition, while 
securing his own safety and the tranquillity 
of the State, spared him an act of cruelty 
which a sovereign less conscientious and 
less magnanimous would have accepted as 
necessary." 

" What unlikelinesses, what contradictions, 
what abounding errors have we here," ex- 
claims Topin, within the compass of a page or 
two ! This strange unknown whom no one is 
allowed to look upon, whose doctor even 
may never see him unmasked, yet who is 
confidently asserted to be beautiful and noble 
of feature : Saint-Mars appointed to the 
Bastille in 1690 (eight years before he received 
that command), and traversing all France 
to seek a prisoner for whom, during twenty- 
eight years, some other gaoler has sufficed : 
this mask with the steel springs which covers 
the prisoner's visage night and day without 



64 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

destroying his health : that beatific resigna- 
tion to his lot, and unwillingness to disclose 
his identity, on the part of a prisoner who 
flings silver plates out of window after com- 
mitting to them some history which all but 
sends the governor into an apoplexy : her 
Majesty's taste for fine linen, so extremely 
unfortunate, since it is presently to be trans- 
formed into invincible proof of the birth of 
an unlawful child : this Queen, again, who has 
been already three times enceinte, heaping 
herself with reproaches that she can give 
the King no heir : her infatuated resolve to 
share with Richelieu, a sworn enemy, the 
secret of a guilty intrigue : a Queen of France, 
in the momentous hour of child-birth, with no 
confidant but the prime minister : and these 
two tremendous events, the birth and stealthy 
removal of a royal child, so shrewdly dis- 
simulated that not a single Memoir of the 
period has mention of them — these are 



ELDER BROTHER AND THE TWIN. 65 

among the first reflections which this amazing 
narrative suggests.* 

And now for the history, not less diverting 
and equally veracious, of the Twin. This is 
the invention wrought by the Abbe Soulavie 
into his apocryphal Memoir es du Marechal 
Due de Richelieu, first published in London 
in 1790. Written in a not inelegant French, 
we are asked to accept it as the composition 
of Saint-Mars,f who, incapable of a literary 
sentence, groaned over the spelling of a six- 
line despatch. 

" The unhappy Prince whom I brought up," 
said the governor, " and of whom I had charge 
to the end of his days, was born the 5th of 
September, 1638, at half-past eight in the 
evening, while the King was at supper. 

* Adapted from Topin. 

t " Relation de la naissance et de l'education du prince infortune 
soustrait par les cardinaux Richelieu et Mazarin a la societe et ren- 
ferme par l'ordre de Louis XIV., composed par le gouverneur de ce 
prince au lit de mort." — M<?m., vol. III., ch. iv. 



66 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

His brother, now reigning as Louis XIV., 
was born at twelve noon, his father being at 
dinner. The pomp and ceremony which 
attended the birth of the King contrasted 
wretchedly with that of his brother, which 
was closely concealed. Louis XIII. was in- 
formed from the Queen's chamber that her 
Majesty was about to be delivered of a second 
child ; and this double birth had already been 
predicted to him by two shepherds, who had 
said in Paris that if the Queen should bring 
two Dauphins into the world, the State were 
lost. Cardinal de Richelieu, consulted by 
the King, replied that, " if two children were 
born, the second must be put out of sight, 
since he might one day claim the throne. 
Tormented by uncertainty as to what course 
he should follow, the King's distress was 
overwhelming when the pains of the second 
accouchement began." The twin was born, 
" daintier and prettier than his elder," and the 



ELDER BROTHER AND THE TWIN. 67 

midwife was charged with his safe keeping ! 
Where the luckless infant was secreted we 
are not told ; merely that dame Peronnette, 
the pearl of midwives, reared him as one of 
her own, and that he was given out for some 
nobleman's love-child : an ideally simple little 
method of disposing of a Child of France. 

At first, it is the great Richelieu him- 
self who undertakes the education of this 
untimely prince, destined, in the event 
of the Dauphin's death, to succeed to 
the throne. Then, to resume the legend 
so absurdly fathered on Saint-Mars, " the 
cardinal confided him to the governor, who 
was to bring him up as the son of a king, 
but in strict secrecy. The governor took him 
to his own estate in Burgundy. The Queen- 
mother seemed to fear that if the birth of this 
young Dauphin became known the malcontents 
of the kingdom would rise in his behalf, because 
of the belief (held from certain of the faculty) 

5* 



66 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

that the last-born of twin brothers is the first 
conceived, and, in consequence, the rightful 
heir. Nevertheless, Anne of Austria could 
not bring herself to destroy the documents 
which established the birth of her son. At 
the age of nineteen, this State secret was dis- 
covered by the prince while spying in a casket 
of his governor, where he came upon letters 
of the Queen and of the Cardinals Richelieu 
and Mazarin. . . . 

" The governor wrote to the Court asking 
for instructions, and both he and his charge 
were ordered to be imprisoned," &c. 

Soulavie has had for his principal supporters 
Dulaure, in his Histoire de Paris (1821) ; 
Fournier and Arnould, in the drama put for- 
ward at the Odeon ; Alexandre Dumas, in the 
Vicomte de Bragelonne ; Levasseur, in a volume 
of the Memoir es pour Tons (1835) ; and the 
historians Sismondi and Michelet. 

These, then, are the two main branches of 



ELDER BROTHER AND THE TWIN. 69 

the system which sets up the Iron Mask as 
a brother of Louis XIV. ; Voltaire's prevailing 
story of an elder brother, with Mazarin as the 
putative father ; and Soulavie's creation, more 
romanesque, if possible, of the twin who 
vanishes in the instant of his appearance. 
With these is linked, and will fall naturally 
into line, the story of the Queen and 
Buckingham. Topin sets out upon his refu- 
tation of the entire system by asking when 
and in what circumstances this most equi- 
vocal brother of Louis XIV. — whether elder 
or twin — could have contrived to slip unseen 
into the world ? His birth has been placed 
at three different dates. Choice may be 
made, for instance, of 1625, after the famous 
visit of the Duke of Buckingham to France ; 
of 1 63 1, following on that grave sickness of 
Louis XIII., which had given rise to fears 
that his hated brother, Gaston d'Orleans, 
might be called to the throne ; or, lastly, 



70 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

1638, eight or nine hours after the birth of 
Louis XIV. If the refutation is to be 
decisive, it should leave no doubt upon the 
mind that the birth of another Dauphin was 
as mythical as his subsequent misfortunes. 



7i 



CHAPTER III 



The 
Infatuation 

of 
Buckingham. 



It was in May, 1625, that the 
brilliant Buckingham went to Paris, 
charged by Charles I. to conduct 
to England his bride Henrietta 
Maria. Charles's ambassador had been wel- 
comed in advance by Louis XIII. " I do 
assure you," that King had written, " you will 
be regarded here, not as a stranger, but as a 
true Frenchman, for indeed you are one at 
heart." And Richelieu had said to the Marquis 
d'Effiat : " M. de Buckingham will find in me a 
brother." Indeed, Buckingham knew France 
well, and had acquired in that country not a 
little of the grace and gloss of manner which 
have been worth so much to his memory. 



72 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

We are not at this day to bestow much praise 
upon this elegant and handsome trifler, no 
fit counsellor for kings, though he had been 
counsellor to two ; but the courtier shone very 
fine in him, and he was an eminently splendid 
figure in a pageant. He made a superb 
entry at the Court of France, " with more 
pomp and glitter than if he had been King," 
says La Rochefoucauld. Madame de Motteville 
adds that the Duke seemed to have treasuries 
at command, and all the Crown Jewels of 
England to heighten the splendour of his 
wardrobe. In the first volume of the Hard- 
wicke State Papers is an account of the 
" vastly rich cloaths " he took with him, " the 
number of his servants, and of the noble 
Personages in his train." A suit of purple 
satin, " embroidered all over with rich orient 
pearls," was valued at .£20,000, and another 
of " white satin uncut velvet, set all over 
with diamonds," at four times that amount. 



INFATUATION OF BUCKINGHAM. 73 

Paris was amazed at the prodigality of 
his display. Certain jewels on the costumes 
that he changed incessantly were sewn 
with such ingenious lack of skill that they 
detached themselves and rolled away, " and 
when they were brought back to him the Duke 
would by no means receive them." Great 
noblemen were in his suite ; he had seven 
grooms of the chamber, thirty chief yeomen, 
and twenty-two cooks, with pages, footmen, 
grooms, huntsmen, outriders, musicians, and 
watermen. Three coaches lined with velvet 
and smothered in gold lace had eight horses 
and six coachmen apiece ; and the Duke had 
his barge, with twenty-two rowers " all in sky- 
coloured tafTety." What with his attendant 
knights, and the pages of the knights, his train 
numbered six or seven hundred persons. He 
was the hero of the town and of the court. 

Dazzled, it may have been, by his own 
magnificence, giddy with the flatteries that were 



74 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

lavished on him, Buckingham at the Court of 
Louis XIII. could see none worthy of his own 
homage but the young, charming, and vivacious 
Queen. He fell violently in love with Anne of 
Austria, who was now between twenty-four 
and twenty-five years of age. ' The Queen, 
being a Spaniard, was a natural coquette ; 
and Madame de Motteville, than whom no 
one knew her better, says that Anne of Austria 
was not disposed to blame a certain open 
and honest gallantry " ou on ne prend aucun 
engagement particulier " — in other words, 
which involves no notion of compromise. 
" She accepted with a certain kindness and 
no seeming surprise a passion which, while 
evoking memories of her own country, and 
even pleasing her amour-propre, offered no 
peril to her virtue." If, however, the 
numerous fetes in Buckingham's honour 
brought him often in the presence of the 
Queen, the Court was witness of their meet- 




George Villiers, first Duke of Buckingham, and his Assassination. 

From an engraving after C. Johnson. 



INFATUATION OF BUCKINGHAM. 77 

ings ; and though this was a circumstance 
which Buckingham might regret, it justified the 
confidence of her Majesty. 

A week of great parade came to an end, 
and Henrietta Maria, gorgeously escorted, 
began her progress towards England. 
Louis XIII., falling unwell, got no farther 
than Compiegne. Anne of Austria, with her 
mother-in-law, Marie de Medici, accompanied 
the bride to Amiens, where the ballets, the 
masques, and the banquets were renewed. 
Buckingham, it is said, invented causes of 
delay, that he might still be haunting the 
skirts of Anne. As Amiens contained no 
palace capable of lodging three queens 
together, their Majesties were separately 
housed ; Anne of Austria in a sumptuous 
building in the midst of a great garden on the 
banks of the Somme. Here the young Queen 
and her Court would often stroll, and here she 
found herself with Buckingham one evening, 



78 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

but not alone. Lord Holland had the Duchesse 
de Chevreuse on his arm, and all the ladies 
of the Queen's suite were in attendance. 
Buckingham conducted Anne ; and it would 
appear that, emboldened by the nearness 
of their hour of separation, he grew more 
ardent in his suit. Night was falling, and at 
the turning of an alley he threw himself at the 
Queen's feet and besought her passionately. 
She, " alarmed, and alive on a sudden to the 
danger she was in, gave a loud cry ; and 
Putange, her equerry, who was walking a 
few paces behind, rushed up and seized 
Buckingham. In a moment the whole Court 
was on the scene, and Buckingham disappeared 
in the crowd." * 

Two days later, Hei^rietta Maria was on her 
way to Boulogne ; Marie de Medici, her 
mother, and Anne of Austria, her sister-in-law, 
going with her to the gates of Amiens. It 

* Topin. 



INFATUATION OF BUCKINGHAM. 79 

was on the step of Anne's carriage that 
Buckingham said his farewell ; " burying his 
face in the window-curtain to conceal his 
tears." The Princesse de Conti, who rode with 
the Queen, said to her (on Madame de Motte- 
ville's assurance), that, "although she could 
answer to the King for the virtue of her 
Majesty, she would say less for her on the 
score of kindness — and she thought the 
Queen's eyes held a kind of pity for the 
defeated lover." 

But Anne had not seen quite the last of him. 
Contrary winds stayed Charles's bride at 
Boulogne, and Buckingham the proud, who 
had stormed Paris in a cuirass of diamonds, 
crept back to Amiens, with Lord Holland for 
accomplice, pretending that a letter of import- 
ance for Marie de Medici had been forgotten. 
It was early morning when he presented him- 
self at Anne's palace; and the Queen, who had 
just been bled for some ailment, was in bed, 



80 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

with several of her ladies about her. In royal 
houses, up to the era of the Revolution, the 
bed-chamber was scarcely more private than 
the boudoir, and Buckingham and Holland 
were introduced. Buckingham " fell on his 
knees at the bedside, kissed the coverlet, and 
broke into a transport of passion, greatly to 
the scandal of the maids of honour. The 
Comtesse de Lannoi, entreating him to rise, 
said severely that these were not French 
ways." " I am not a Frenchman," replied 
the Duke, and he continued to plead tenderly 
with the Queen. Her Majesty, greatly em- 
barrassed, could find nothing to say, until she 
roused herself to reproach the Duke for his 
boldness. But this she did with no great show 
of indignation, and her heart was perhaps not 
quite untouched." * Buckingham returned to 
Boulogne, and never saw Anne of Austria 
again. 

* Topin. 



INFATUATION OF BUCKINGHAM. 83 

These are the two memorable scenes of 
Amiens with which scandal was once very- 
busy, but with which history, seeking proofs, 
was never seriously concerned. During the 
troubles of the Fronde, and the heat of civil 
war, the hint of a criminal love between 
Buckingham and the Queen, whose honour he 
would very willingly have spoiled, was bruited 
often ; but all the evidence goes to show that 
Anne of Austria outwitted a passionate, 
unscrupulous gallant, and was never for an 
instant his victim. A kind of Spanish tender- 
ness she may have felt for him, and we may 
suspect her of no small skill in flirtation ; but, 
as there is no particle of evidence to adduce, 
accusation may go no farther. It is abundantly 
clear that, so far as Buckingham was con- 
cerned, the Queen was never without witnesses 
to her conduct. Marie de Medici, who bore 
her daughter-in-law no very goodwill at this 
period, took upon herself to assure Louis XIII. 



84 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK, 

that he need not concern himself with rumour; 
that even if the Queen had been willing to 
demean herself she was so perpetually sur- 
rounded that the opportunity could never 
have offered. As for the impetuous indis- 
cretions of Buckingham, the Queen had not 
encouraged and could not well have prevented 
them : in her younger days, said Madame de 
Medici to her son, such things had happened 
to herself.* Madame might have added that 
the Due de Montmorency and the Due de 
Bellegarde had both been in love with the 
fascinating Queen of Louis XIII., and that 
neither of them had fared one whit better than 
Buckingham. 

Says Topin: — " Nothing seems to accuse the 
Queen save the persistent coldness towards her 
of Louis XIII. But does this conduct date 
from the visit of Buckingham to Paris ? Was 
Louis so completely estranged from the Queen 

* Memoires of La Porte. 



INFATUATION OF BUCKINGHAM. 85 

as has been supposed ? And may we seek in 
this the proof of an act of infidelity on the 
Queen's part, whether with Buckingham in 
1625, as the result of love, or with some person 
unknown, in 1630, as the result of deliberate 
calculation, and to the end that, after the death 
of Louis XIII., which at that moment seemed 
imminent, she might reign in the name of her 
illegitimate child, who, on the King's un- 
expected recovery, must be hidden away, to 
become later the Man in the Iron Mask ?" 



86 



CHAPTER IV. 

Born within eight days of one 

The Acquittal 

0l another, Anne of Austria, Infanta 
the queen. Q f Spain, and Louis, Dauphin of 
France, may be said to have been pledged 
in infancy. Astrologers had announced that, 
delivered under one star, they were des- 
tined to love each other, married or not 
married. The little Anne lent a willing ear 
to the wise men's predictions ; and when, at 
the age of twelve, she was bidding good-bye 
to the Due de Mayenne, who had come to 
Madrid to sign the marriage contract, she 
instructed him to tell the King that she was 
"extremely impatient to see him." Her 
governess was shocked, but the Infanta replied 
that it had always been recommended to her 
to speak the truth. Two years later, in 1615, 



THE ACQUITTAL OF THE QUEEN. 87 

she was a bride of fourteen, and as enthusiastic 
as ever about the boy she had married. 

Much less enthusiastic was the boy. He 
had always declared that he hated the 
Spaniards, " because they are the enemies of 
Papa " ; and on two occasions, when his father, 
Henri IV., talked to him of his future marriage 
with the Infanta, he gave stubborn answers in 
the negative. He was grave and observant 
for his years, intolerant of the King's mistresses 
who tried to conciliate him, and precociously 
fierce against their children, whom he would 
not call his brothers and would not suffer at 
his table. After the death of Henry IV., the 
boy-King shewed himself less and less in 
sympathy with the gross speech and habits of 
the Court, and was fonder of hawking than of 
chambering. 

The idea of marriage seems always to have 
repelled him, and after four years of wedded 
life, Anne was a wife only to the extent that 



88 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

the church had made her one. The conduct 
of the King had become, indeed, almost a 
question of State. His determined abstention 
had moved the French Court, it had offended 
the Court of Spain, it was regarded as a slight 
by the papal nuncio and the Court of Tuscany, 
whose aid had been considerable in bringing 
about the union. 

In January, 1619, some kind of rapproche- 
ment seems to have been effected, but the 
hopes that were built on it were disappointed. 
Again in 1622 it was said with confidence 
that an heir to the throne might be expected, 
but almost immediately afterwards the Queen 
was the victim of an accident. The visit of 
Buckingham left the King unmoved, and had 
no result in modifying his relations with the 
Queen. Having freed himself from his 
mother's yoke, Louis XIII. passed absolutely 
under that of Richelieu ; and jealously as the 
cardinal-minister watched the young sovereign, 




Louis XIII. 



THE ACQUITTAL OF THE QUEEN. 91 

he was yet more jealous in his surveillance of 
the Queen, an object of his implacable resent- 
ment. Is it possible for one moment to believe 
in an intrigue of hers, with Buckingham, with 
Mazarin, or with another, which Richelieu 
fails to know of, whose spies penetrated to the 
inmost recesses of the Court ? And knowing 
it, would he have hesitated an instant to ruin 
the woman whom he hated, by confiding his 
knowledge to the King ? 

Let us consider next the circumstances of 
the illness of Louis XIII. in 1630. The King 
fell ill at Lyons, not, says Topin, at the 
beginning of August (which has been asserted), 
but on the 22nd of September; " and here 
the dates are of the utmost importance." On 
the 29th, an exhausting dysentery added itself 
to a severe attack of fever, and at midnight 
the doctors despaired of saving him. He took 
a tender farewell of the Queen, and entreated 
her forgiveness for all things. Towards noon 



92 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

of the next day the King still lingered, and 
the Archbishop of Lyons was preparing to 
administer extreme unction, when the doctors, 
who had already bled the enfeebled body six 
times, ordered a seventh bleeding. This 
would assuredly have carried off the patient, 
but before the operation could be performed 
the true cause of the malady revealed itself: 
an abscess in the stomach broke, and the 
King was saved. 

On his recovery, Louis XIII. quitted Lyons 
with the Queen, whose unaffected tender- 
ness and solicitude at his sick bed had 
touched him closely. " In that crisis, both 
had forgotten the past. The coldness of the 
one was overcome, the wounded pride of the 
other was healed." Exulting in her unwonted 
empire, it was not enough for the Queen to 
have won a tardy place in her husband's 
heart ; she desired to complete her triumph 
by casting down the minister who had -opposed 



THE ACQUITTAL OF THE QUEEN. 93 

himself between them, and, at one moment, 
she had nearly been successful — but the King 
could rule only by the Cardinal. 

In January, 1631, the Queen was manifestly 
enceinte. Supposing this the result of a 
criminal intrigue, at what date should the 
commencement of the pregnancy be placed ? 

" Is it, as was asserted, at the moment and 
by reason of the apparently imminent death 
of Louis XIII.? But the Queen was delivered 
within the first five days of April ; consequently 
the child, conceived the 30th of September, 
would by no means have attained the full 
period, and could not, therefore, have become 
the Man in the Iron Mask.* Was it on the 
arrival of Louis XIII. at Lyons early in the 
August of 1630? But at this date, Anne of 
Austria had not the vital motive for becoming 
a mother, which, according to her accusers, 

* The medical science of the present day might succeed in saving 
such a child ; but the chances would be very slight indeed. 



94 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

she had on the 30th of September, when the 
King lay on the threshold of death. Either, 
then, the child is born incapable of living, 
or its conception mounts to an epoch which 
makes Louis XIII. the father, because the 
Queen had no need to procure herself an heir 
by unlawful means." 

The truth is, that this, the third pregnancy 
of Anne of Austria, traces to the reconciliation 
which followed on the desperate illness of 
the King. Richelieu himself is a witness here. 
" If France should be blessed with this 
fortune," he wrote, "it will be the fruit of 
God's blessing, and of the kindly relations 
established of late between his Majesty and 
the Queen." * Not a word on Richelieu's part 
which inculpates or seeks to inculpate the 

* Lett res et papier s de Richelieu. Found among the letters and 
documents which passed from the hands of the Duchesse d'Aiguillon, 
Richelieu's niece, to the Archives de VEtat, and which were published 
by the learned Avenet in his collection of Documents inedits de 
Vhistoire de France. 



THE ACQUITTAL OF THE QUEEN. 95 

Queen, and it has been observed with justice, 
that history could never hope to be better 
instructed than that " clairvoyant and pitiless 



minister." 



Not for seven years were the ardent hopes 
of the nation to be realised. On the 5th of 
September, 1638, Anne of Austria gave birth 
to a son who was to ascend the throne as 
Louis XIV. This is also the day which has 
been assigned to the birth of the Iron Mask 
by those who, rejecting the theory of an 
illegitimate child, have pronounced for that 
of a twin brother, born in the evening, " and 
condemned, for his tardy arrival, to perpetual 
imprisonment." The problem of the twin is 
briefly to be considered. In no country in 
Europe, perhaps, was the birth of a royal child 
more jealously scrutinised, more elaborately 
and minutely attested, than in the France of 
the Monarchy. Such an event might over- 
whelm the expectations of a collateral heir, 



96 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

or might ruin the prospects of a party. 
Precautions the most extraordinary were 
employed, precautions which may be said, 
practically, to have excluded the possibility 
of fraud or deception. Not only were the 
greatest persons in the State compelled to be 
eye-witnesses of the event, but the people 
itself was summoned " to assist "at the birth 
of the Child of France. The doors of the 
royal dwelling were flung open in this solemn 
hour, the people thronged in, and passed freely 
into the innermost chambers of the palace. 
Madame Campan relates how, at the birth 
of the first child of Marie Antoinette, the room 
in which the Queen lay was so intolerably 
crowded that Louis XVI. broke a window 
to let in more air. Indeed, this practice, so 
distressing and humiliating to the royal mother, 
was invariable and all but immemorial. 

It was not omitted at the birth of Louis XIV. 
At five o'clock on the morning of the 5th of 



THE ACQUITTAL OF THE QUEEN. 97 

September, 1638, Louis XIII. was summoned 
to the Queen's chamber, where he remained 
until he had the happiness to know that a 
son and heir had been born to him. At 
six, there arrived in succession at Saint- 
Germain, the King's brother, Gaston d'Orleans 
(who had a vital interest in assuring him- 
self that the birth was genuine), the Prin- 
cesse de Conde, Madame de Vendome, the 
Chancellor, Madame de Lansac (the future 
governess of the prince) and Mesdames de 
Senecey and de la Flotte of the royal house- 
hold. Close to the Queen's couch an altar 
had been raised, where the Bishops of Lisieux, 
Meaux, and Beauvais pronounced mass in 
turn. Pressing up to the altar and flowing 
out into the room beyond, were princesses, 
dukes, duchesses, and bishops, " with a vast 
crowd of the common folk who had invaded 
the palace from an early hour, and who now 
completely filled it." 

7 



98 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

At eleven a.m. precisely the Queen's pangs 
were over, and the birth of a prince was 
announced. The resentment, ill-concealed, 
of Gaston d'Orleans did not escape a few 
observant eyes, but passed almost unnoticed 
amid the general joy. The melancholy Louis 
XIII. broke into smiles, and called on those 
around him to admire the fine proportions 
of his son. Shortly afterwards, and in the 
Queen's chamber, the Child of France was 
baptised by the Bishop of Meaux, chaplain-in- 
chief. A King's messenger was despatched 
in all haste to bear the great news to 
Paris, but the joyous cries of the populace 
outran his horse all along the route, and 
as the messenger galloped into the capital, 
the bells were already swinging in every 
church. 

Meanwhile, what of the Twin ? The state- 
ment of Soulavie was, it will be remembered, 
that the Queen was delivered at eight in the 




Cardinal Richelieu. 
After Champaigne. 



THE ACQUITTAL OF THE QUEEN. 101 

evening of a second son, who, conformably 
to Richelieu's counsel, was privily and at 
once put away. The role here invented for 
Richelieu was of such immense importance 
that Soulavie should at least have been careful 
to know where the Cardinal was at this capital 
moment. For the truth is that Richelieu 
was not at Saint-Germain at all. He had 
quitted the Court at the end of July ; he was 
at Saint-Quentin on the day of Louis XIV.'s 
birth, and he did not return to Paris until 
the 2nd of October. The letter of congratula- 
tion which he wrote to their Majesties from 
Saint-Quentin is printed in his Lettres et 
papier s. Richelieu, then, is summoned in vain 
as a principal instrument of the plot imagined 
by Soulavie. As the Queen's enemy, he had 
every interest to denounce her to the King ; 
as her suppositious friend and accomplice, 
he could scarcely have aided, at the distance 
of Saint-Quentin, the conspiracy which must 



io2 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

have been compressed within an hour at the 
utmost in the palace of Saint-Germain. 

But let Richelieu be dismissed from the 
case. We are to receive as plausible the 
suggestion that a twin brother of Louis XIV. 
is born without the knowledge of the Court. 
The birth is nine hours late, but the palace 
is still swarming with the princes of the 
family — and no one has heard of it. Or, it 
is known to all, and all are agreed, for no 
conceivable reason, to keep the secret. The 
secret is so well kept, moreover, that never 
once is it divulged or even hinted at in any 
Memoir of the period. We have contem- 
porary notices of Anne of Austria which are 
scarcely discreet, and we have others which 
are less than discreet ; but we have no record 
of her by any writer of her own day which 
contains the faintest reference to the surrep- 
titious birth of a twin brother of Louis XIV. 

Let this birth, however, be admitted. Let 



THE ACQUITTAL OF THE QUEEN. 103 

it be supposed that, at eight in the evening, 
the witnesses were few, and had pledged 
themselves to secrecy. Was there any reason 
for secrecy? Why should Louis XIII. be, 
as Soulavie says, on the point of fainting 
when he learns that he has two heirs instead 
of one ? The question of the trouble that 
might arise from the idea that the second 
born is the first conceived is not admissible ; 
for, never sanctioned in medicine, this em- 
pirical theory had no recognition in the law 
of France. From commoner to King, the 
first-born was the heir. Far, therefore, from 
being alarmed by the birth of a twin, Louis 
XIII. had reason to praise his fortune, for 
the right of inheritance was now doubly 
consolidated in his own family. 

Once more, however, for the rounding off 
of the argument, let the impossible be received 
and acquiesced in. This ambiguous son of 
Anne of Austria is born, we will say. He is 



104 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

brought into the world shortly before 1625, and 
Buckingham is his father; or in 1631, when 
Louis XIII. is believed to be dying, and 
Mazarin, or some gallant unknown, is his 
father; or in 1638, when he is presented to 
us as the most interesting, the most romantic, 
and the most unfortunate of twins. Entrusted 
to some creature of consummate devotion and 
discretion, he is reared in the country ; and 
if, in the course of time, there is developed a 
rather striking likeness to a certain Queen- 
mother or a King, no one perceives it, or 
those who do perceive it are polite enough 
to refrain from questions. But at what epoch 
was he imprisoned, and for what cause ? 
" From the day that he becomes the famous 
prisoner whom Saint-Mars conducts in 1698 
from Sainte-Marguerite to the Bastille, we 
have the right to ask when, how, and in 
what circumstances he was arrested and con- 
fided to his gaoler ? " 



THE ACQUITTAL OF THE QUEEN. 105 

He was allowed his liberty, we will suppose, 
during the lifetime of Anne of Austria; that 
would be not unreasonable, provided he were 
kept out of sight. Was he imprisoned after 
her death ? But Anne of Austria died in 
January, 1666, and Saint-Mars receives no 
prisoner. Did the arrest take place, as 
Voltaire affirms, in 1661, after the death of 
Mazarin ? But at this date, and three years 
later, Saint-Mars was still an officer of 
musketeers. It was not until December, 1664, 
that he was appointed to the governorship 
of Pignerol, where, in the following month, 
he received Fouquet into his keeping. On 
the 20th of August, 1669, arrives at Pignerol 
a second prisoner, one Eustache Dauger. 
But Dauger is known to us : an obscure 
spy, he was given as a servant to Fouquet. 
Is it likely that Saint- Mars would have 
appointed to wait on Fouquet — who had 
passed all his life near Louis XIV. and 



io6 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

Anne of Austria — a prince whose features 
recalled the King's ? From the date of 
Dauger's imprisonment no other prisoner is 
sent to Saint-Mars until the Comte de 
Lauzun goes to Pignerol in 167 1. After 
that, at long intervals, other prisoners are 
led thither, but they are all identified, their 
crimes or their faults are known. 

" We see them sometimes not too well 
treated; and when, in i68r, Saint-Mars passes 
from the command of Pignerol to that of 
Exiles, he takes with him two prisoners 
only, whom he styles contemptuously "a pair 
of gaol-birds." At Exiles, at Pignerol, at 
Sainte-Marguerite (which dungeon w T as taken 
over by Saint-Mars in 1687), if new prisoners 
are entrusted to him, we know to what 
motives their incarceration may be attributed ; 
and nothing in their past, nothing in their 
treatment in prison, nothing in their conduct 
allows us to suspect in any one of them a 




Cardinal Mazarin. 

After Mignard. 



THE ACQUITTAL OF THE QUEEN. 109 

brother of Louis XIV. Needless to say, 
Saint-Mars would not be likely to designate 
his prince by name in any official despatch, 
nor should proof of that kind be demanded. 
But when, after having examined in turn all 
the prisoners whom the future governor of 
the Bastille had in his charge — and among 
whom must of necessity be found that 
mysterious one with whom he traversed 
France in 1698 — we have satisfied ourselves 
as to the causes of their arrest, and have 
penetrated into their past ; when a hundred 
authentic despatches* render it absolutely 
certain that beyond these prisoners there 
was no other, have we not reason to conclude 
with the question : Where then is the son of 
Anne d' Autriche ? " f 

Tradition, fable, legend, ensnare us at 

: * Archives du ministere de la marine. — Archives du ministere de la 
guerre. — Archives du ministere des affaires itrangeres. — Archives 
impiriales .\ 
t Topin. 



no THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

every turn in this enquiry. Truth and fiction 
are interwoven in the strangest manner. 
Around every legendary hero the adventures 
of other persons gradually group themselves, 
and this has been signally the case with the 
Man in the Mask. How interesting — in its 
relation to the hypothesis of the king's 
brother — is the story of the boundless defer- 
ence shown to the prisoner, and the visit he 
received at Sainte-Marguerite from the minis- 
ter Louvois, who addresses him " with a 
consideration savouring of respect." But we 
shall see presently that no one goes out of 
his way to show deference to the Mask ; and, 
as for the visit of Louvois, that is pure in- 
vention. In 1680 (eight years, be it noted, 
before Saint-Mars took the Man in the 
Mask to the Isles) Louvois, who had broken 
his leg, went to Bareges for a few weeks to 
complete his cure In Rousset's Histoire 
de Louvois, we have the detailed itinerary 



THE ACQUITTAL OF THE QUEEN, m 

of the journey, and Sainte- Marguerite is not 
found in it ; nor, after this, was Louvois 
ever again in the south of France. The 
piquant episode of the silver plate (trans- 
formed by Pere Papon into a linen shirt) 
is bound up with the theory of a brother 
or a twin brother of Louis XIV., and is 
highly interesting as an example of the 
commingling of fact with fiction in the 
popular history of the Mask. The story of 
the plate, as will be plain, has its origin in 
the attempt at escape of a Protestant minis- 
ter confined at Sainte-Marguerite in 1692. 
Indeed, it was scarcely even an attempt at 
escape : the Protestant minister writes some 
complaint on his pewter-plate or vessel (is it 
necessary to say that State prisoners of the 
17th century were not served on silver?), 
and flings it out of window. Out of this 
commonplace fact has arisen the pungent 
tale of the silver dish which is nearly the 



ii2 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

death of the fisherman who rescues it. It 
was believed — and it has still a kind of 
illiterate currency. 

There are legends which, doing hurt to 
no one's memory, it seems almost a pity to 
displace by fact ; but it is always grateful 
to slay a fable which has involved a repu- 
tation in disgrace. This has been the inte- 
rest and the motive of refuting once again 
the discarded and long-contemned invention 
of Voltaire, which, modified variously by 
successive writers, has crammed the mind of 
Christendom. It may lessen the charm of 
the story to remove from it the captivating 
person of a brother of Louis XIV., but the 
arid truth of history repeats that the Iron 
Mask was not a son of Anne of Austria. 
Who |has proved the birth of the pretended 
prince ? Who 'will give the date of his 
imprisonment ? Not even in the France of 
the old Monarchy were royal infants delivered 



THE ACQUITTAL OF THE QUEEN. 113 

by the gods, and inscrutably concealed by 
them. The malign concept of Voltaire 
returns again to the rag-bag of Time — alms 
meet for oblivion. 



TI4 



CHAPTER V. 

English readers will not expect to 

The Expiation 

of be detained long over the case of 
Monmouth. Monmouth. Monmouth's claims to 
the mask were the imagination of an ex-officer 
of French cavalry, by name Germain-Francois 
Poullain de Saint-Foix.* Single-handed he 
defended them, but with the valour of six. His 
hypothesis was only too easily destroyed, and 
perhaps its most valid title to respect during 
the lifetime of Saint-Foix lay in his perfect 
readiness to prove it at the point of the 
rapier. 

The early career of Monmouth scarcely con- 
cerns us. The natural son of Charles II. and 
Lucy Walter or Walters (the " browne, beauti- 

* Born February 5, 1698; died August 25, 1776. — lung. 



THE EXPIATION OF MONMOUTH. 115 

ful, bold, but insipid creature " whom the diarist 
Evelyn encountered in Paris), his father doted 
on him, the Court spoiled him, and, in the 
prime of manhood he was, for the general 
people — 

The young men's vision, and the old men's dream ! 

The line is Dryden's, and the famous flattery 
of the picture in " Absalom and Achitophel " 
may once again be cited : — 

Early in foreign fields he won renown, 
With kings and states allied to Israel's crown : 
In peace the thoughts of war he could remove, 
And seem'd as he were only born for love. 
Whate'er he did, was done with so much ease, 
In him alone 'twas natural to please : 
His motions all accompanied with grace ; 
And Paradise was open'd in his face. 

History has rejected the verdict of Monmouth's 
contemporaries. A man of brilliant looks and 
most eminent graces of person, a polished 
courtier, a sportsman, and (save at the crisis of 
Sedgemoor) a brave man in battle : these were 

certainly his best recommendations to the 

8* 



n6 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

general goodwill. He lacked almost every 
element of greatness. His conduct of the 
rebellion against James II. showed that he was 
neither a leader nor an organiser ; defeated, he 
left his devoted followers to their fate ; and, in 
the most critical hour of his existence — the 
interview with the implacable James — he dis- 
played a cowardice and a baseness of spirit 
which disgusted the King, amazed and shocked 
the French ambassador, and drew down upon 
his memory the scathing rebukes of Macaulay. 
Day was not yet full come on the morning of 
the 6th of July, 1685, when Monmouth, with 
Grey and the German Buyse beside him, was 
riding in flight from the lost field of Sedge- 
moor. It is but just to say that, up to the 
moment^at which he knew himself defeated, he 
had fought, on foot and pike in hand, like a 
stalwart soldier. But the moment of defeat 
was surely the one in which a rebel of courage 
and of heart would remember the men whom he 




Charles II. 

From an engraving by Sherwln. [The wax effigy in Westminster Abbey 

was modelled from this' engraving.] 



THE EXPIATION OF MONMOUTH. 119 

had summoned to his flag. History has few 
more touching instances of devotion to a feeble 
cause than those which the wretched memory 
of Sedgemoor will eternally evoke. Those 
" Mendip miners " and poor peasants, with 
their scythes and bludgeons and a few old 
rusty guns, who shouted for " King 
Monmouth " while Monmouth was among 
them, and who tried to stem the whirlwind 
of James's cavalry when Monmouth had 
abandoned them, deserved to die for a 
better treason, and for a nobler traitor. 

There is no need to rehearse again the 
details of the flight and capture of Monmouth. 
He must have realised his doom in the hour 
of his arrest, and it remained to him only to 
meet it as the son of a king, and as the van- 
quished leader of an ineffectual revolt. But 
twice he failed, and despicably, in the fortitude 
that inspires the great insurgent. He had 
abandoned his heroic peasants when his mili- 



J20 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

tary knowledge told him that the battle had 
gone to the King ; and he abandoned his own 
manhood when he found himself in James's 
clutches. His letter to the King from Ring- 
wood is branded by Macaulay as "that of a 
man whom a craven fear had made insensible 
to shame" — his behaviour in the interview with 
the King degrades him deeper still. It was an 
interview which James II. should never have 
accorded. He was justified in sending to the 
scaffold an enemy who had not only usurped 
the title of king, but whose proclamation was 
charged with hideous libels ; but, having 
resolved upon the death of Monmouth, James 
should not, in common humanity, have 
admitted him to his presence. That cruel 
favour, worthy of the most resentful sovereign 
in English history, tempted the beaten and 
broken Monmouth to plead miserably and most 
ignominiously for the life which was already 
lost to him. 



THE EXPIATION OF MONMOUTH. 121 

With his arms bound, Monmouth grovelled 
on the floor at the King's feet ; tried to 
embrace him by the knees ; begged for life, for 
life only. The champion of Protestantism — a 
position which had disgraced him with his 
father, and the plea which had supported his 
rebellion against his uncle — he offered, in his 
last desperate extremity, to become a Catholic. 
James turned from him in contempt, and 
Monmouth's final hope was extinguished. 

It is at this dramatic moment that M. 
Germain-Francois Poullain de Saint-Foix ap- 
propriates the doomed adventurer, hands him 
over to Louis XIV., who passes him on to 
Saint-Mars, who transforms him into the Man 
in the Mask. 

James the unforgiving, it is pretended, for- 
gave his nephew on the very eve of the fate 
he had ordained for him ; and Louis of France 
consented to receive and lodge him for life in 
one of his convenient dungeons. This, of 



122 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

course, implies that it was not Monmouth, but 
some magnanimous substitute for that prince, 
whom Ketch, with the clumsiness of fright, 
mangled to death on Tower Hill, on the morn- 
ing of the 15th of July, 1685. How then was 
the fraud accomplished ? With the ease which 
. might be expected, when a relenting sovereign 
and uncle needs fortune's aid. An officer of 
Monmouth, condemned with him to the axe, 
and strikingly like the Duke, agreed to per- 
sonate him on the scaffold ! Prelates not 
acquainted with Monmouth were chosen to 
attend his last moments, and the execution was 
hurried, that there might be no opportunity for 
a " dying speech " to the crowd, and no oppor- 
tunity for the crowd to recognise the generous 
impostor. The situation would no doubt be 
an extremely taking one in the theatre ; but it 
was not the situation on the morning of 
Monmouth's death. The divines by whom he 
was accompanied to Tower Hill were the same 




The Duke of Monmouth. 
From a contemporary German Broadsheet. 



THE EXPIATION OF MONMOUTH. 125 

who had exhorted him in the Tower ; and the 
scene on the scaffold, far from being hurried, 
was so protracted that it must have been an 
agony to the spectators who had thronged in 
thousands to see their idol die. Nor was there 
any unseemly eagerness on the part of those 
in attendance upon Monmouth to send their 
victim in silence to the block : on the contrary, 
as will be seen, it was Monmouth himself who 
held back, when urged by them to address the 
soldiers. 

It is when he comes to the proof that Saint- 
Foix, as may be imagined, is so terribly hard 
put to it. He has not even stubble for his 
bricks. Beyond the tradition of the feigned 
execution of Monmouth (which was for many 
years a cherished belief of our own west- 
country peasants), he offers only the vaguest 
of rumours and the idlest of conjectures. He 
cites (with a confession of little confidence) an 
anonymous libel published in Amsterdam and 



126 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

Paris, under the title Amours de Charles II 
et de Jacques II. , rois d 1 Angleterre, wherein 
Skelton, whom William of Orange had re- 
moved from the lieutenancy of the Tower, is 
reported as informing Lord Danby that "on 
the night after the pretended execution of the 
Duke of Monmouth, the King, accompanied 
by three men, came himself to remove him 
from the Tower. They covered his head with 
a kind of hood, and the King and the three 
mounted with him into a coach." Although 
this tract is put forward by Saint-Foix as one 
of his principal pieces, he spoils at a stroke 
whatever worth it may have had for him by 
the candid admission that it should be classed 
with "those books whose authors seek only to 
entertain their readers." 

His next witness is one Nelaton, a surgeon, 
and a haunter of that hot-bed of gossip the 
Cafe Procope. which has but lately disappeared 
from Paris. Nelaton's friends of the Cafe were 



THE EXPIATION OF MONMOUTH 127 

familiar with a story which he did not tire of 
rehearsing : how that, being chief assistant to 
a surgeon near the Porte Saint-Antoine, he was 
sent one day to bleed a prisoner of the Bastille ; 
the governor took him into the chamber of the 
prisoner, whose head was covered with a long 
towel knotted on the neck ; the prisoner 
complained of great pains in the head ; he 
wore a dressing-gown of black and yellow, 
ornamented with large fleurs d'or — and the 
surgeon's assistant perceived by the prisoner's 
accent that he was an Englishman. How and 
by whom the Englishman with his head veiled 
in a towel was identified with Monmouth, Saint- 
Foix omits to say. 

From the Cafe Procope the simple advo- 
cate conducts his audience to the boudoir of 
that light-behaved celebrity, the Duchess of 
Portsmouth. " Father Tournemine has often 
repeated to me that, paying a visit to the 
Duchess of Portsmouth with Father Sanders, 



128 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

the ancient confessor of King James, the 
Duchess told them that she should always re- 
proach the memory of that sovereign with the 
execution of the Duke of Monmouth, remem- 
bering that Charles II., in the hour of his death 
and on the point of receiving the sacrament, 
had made him promise before the Host (which 
the priest Huldeston * had secretly conveyed), 
that, whatever rebellion Monmouth might at- 
tempt, he would never put him to death. — 
' Madame,' answered Father Sanders with 
vivacity, 'he did not put him to death.' ' 

And here, to conclude, is ¦ Saint-Foix's 
crowning proof: On the rumour in London, 
which gathered as it rolled, that an officer re- 
sembling Monmouth had been decapitated in 
his stead, a "grande dame" — not named to us — 
bribed certain persons — not named to us — to 
open the coffin; and, "having looked closely 

* Huddleston, the priest who had saved Charles's life after the 
battle of Worcester, and who received his last confession. 




IAMKS II BY V 

j OF4&OB KlKTG J 



James II. 
From an engraving by Claes Visscher. 



THE EXPIATION OF MONMOUTH. 131 

at the right arm, exclaimed — ' This is not 
Monmouth!' " 

Thus, for the confusion of later generations, 
were systems of the Mask erected towards the 
end of the eighteenth century. This is the 
case, and the whole case of Germain-Francois 
Poullain de Saint-Foix. And this is to stand 
against the vouchers of eye-witnesses of Mon- 
mouth's death, the written and extant testimony 
of the bishops who stood with him on the 
scaffold, the detailed despatches sent by the 
French Ambassador in London to Louis XIV. 
in Paris, the Memoirs of the age, and the im- 
partial conclusions of history, based on what is 
described by Macaulay as " the strongest evi- 
dence by which the fact of a death was ever 
verified." 

. But let Saint-Foix not be dismissed too 
coldly from us. We owe him, at least, a 
"homage of amaze." The callous invention 
of Voltaire, the light deceit of Soulavie, were 

9* 



132 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

certain of a hearing, and they have had it for 
an age; but we are dumbly to praise the forlorn 
pugnacity of this ex-officer of cavalry, ready 
and eager to pink the critic who would not 
be persuaded that a barber's assistant had 
identified Monmouth through the folds of a 
towel tied over his face. For the purposes of 
fiction, by the way, this was a stronger story 
than the legend of the twin brother : it attaches 
itself to the fancy — on the one hand, an 
English peasantry fondly believing in the 
second coming of an idolised prince ; on the 
other hand, the victim of Sedgemoor following 
Saint-Mars from one French dungeon to an- 
other, and, after missing a throne and escaping 
a scaffold, buried in the murk of a November 
twilight by two turnkeys of the Bastille.* 

On the evening of Monday, 13th of July, 
Monmouth knew that he was to die on Wed- 
nesday morning. Clarendon, Keeper of the 

* Topin. 



THE EXPIATION OF MONMOUTH. 133 

Privy Seal, had visited him in the Tower, and 
had assured him that no hope remained. Two 
bishops came next, Turner of Ely and Ken of 
Bath and Wells, u with a solemn message from 
the King." Monmouth, bloodless and terror- 
stricken, could not be brought to resign 
himself. If no pardon, might not a respite be 
obtained ? The prelates, more anxious at this 
crisis for his ghostly than for his physical wel- 
fare, exhorted him vainly ; and were greatly 
scandalised by Monmouth's heretical plea of 
the propriety, " in the sight of God," of his 
relations with his mistress, Lady Wentworth. 
They left him, after adjuring him to spend the 
night in prayer for spiritual enlightenment. 

Tuesday came and passed, bringing neither 
pardon nor respite ; and Monmouth's last day 
began. At an early hour he parted from his 
wife and children ; showing, it is said, kindness 
but no emotion : he had sunk from terror to a 
dull despair. Lady Wentworth, who, in a few 



i 3 4 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

short months, was to follow her lover to the 
grave, did not see him. 

The hour of ten brought the coach of the 
lieutenant of the Tower; and now, with Death's 
hand upon him, Monmouth grew calm and 
dignified. At his request, the divines who had 
visited him in the Tower went with him to the 
scaffold, and continued to exhort him to the 
last : — " God accept your repentance ! God 
accept your imperfect repentance ! "* 

Mournful faces thronged about the scaffold, 
and Tower Hill was " covered up to the 
chimney tops with an innumerable multitude 
of gazers," weeping, or silently indignant. 
Monmouth, as he passed between the ranks of 
the guards, saluted them with a smile ; and he 
mounted the scaffold without a tremor. The 
crowd hungered for his words, but he said very 
little, protesting that he died " a Protestant of 
the Church of England." The bishops broke 

* Macaulay. 




The Execution of Monmouth on Tower Hill. 
From a German Broadsheet. 



THE EXPIATION OF MONMOUTH. 137 

in upon this, saying that as a member of that 
church he must submit himself to his King, 
and acknowledge the sinfulness of his rebellion. 
Once again the prelates interfered, when Mon- 
mouth would have spoken of Lady Wentworth. 
He declared his sorrow for the sufferings he 
had brought upon his followers ; then the 
bishops "prayed with him long and fervently,' , 
and Monmouth, after a troubled pause, added 
a slow " Amen " to the closing prayer for the 
King. Entreated to speak to the soldiers, " I 
will make no speeches," he exclaimed ; and 
addressed himself forthwith to the executioner, 
to whom he gave six guineas, with injunctions 
to despatch him swiftly, and not to hack him 
"as you did my Lord Russell." But this com- 
mand, and possibly also the long and painful 
scene he had been witness of, and the con- 
sciousness that the people loathed him for the 
dreadful work he had to do, unnerved the 
headsman utterly. Again and again the axe 



i 3 8 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

fell on Monmouth ; the wretched Ketch flung 
it from him, took it up again at the sheriffs 
command, and finally severed the head from 
the shoulders with a knife,* amid screams of 
rage and horror from the crowd. 

The vengeance of the relentless James, 
which history, nevertheless, cannot severely 
reproach, was satisfied. Monmouth's head and 
body were gathered up, and buried privately 
the same day under the communion table of 
St. Peters Chapel in the Tower of London. 
An abstract of his speech on the scaffold, 
published by his partisans, has been rejected 
as spurious. 

*He "severed not his head from his body till he cut it off with a 
knife." — Verney MSS. 



139 



CHAPTER VI. 

Between the years 1754 and 1789, 

"The King 

of the three writers in succession espoused 
Markets." ^ cause G f the Due de Beaufort 
as a candidate for the mask. At the 
respected age of eighty (for he was born 
in 1674), the abbe Lenglet-Dufresnoy * first 
advanced this curious opinion, in his Plan de 
r histoire generate et particuliere de la monarchie 
franfoise, a treatise in three volumes i2mo, 
published in 1754. 

*The abbe, an ingenious student, had had the philosopher's full share 
of imprisonment under the absolute monarchy, for he was twice con- 
fined in the Dungeon of Vincennes and six times in the Bastille. It 
was, in the eighteenth century especially, an approved method of 
recognising distinction in letters ; and the abbe did not complain. Far 
from it ; he always obeyed his summons with the greatest alacrity, 
declaring that prison was the best place in the world to work in ; 
packed a few clean shirts and his MSS., and rode off with the officer 
who had come for him. 



i 4 o THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

The systeme Beaufort seems to have been the 
especial snare of age, for Lagrange-Chancel,* of 
the Philippiques, carried fourscore years and 
three, when, in 1759, in an article in Freron's 
Annee litteraire, he defended Lenglet-Du- 
fresnoy. 

The historian Anquetil was nearing the 
seventies when he lent his support to the same 
theory in his Louis XIV., sa Cour et le Regent, 

1789. 

Since the year of the Revolution, Beaufort's 
claim has gone undefended. It shall engage us 
very briefly. 

Topin has noted the slight comparison that 
may be established between Beaufort and 
Monmouth. Both were royal princes, of 
illegitimate origin ; both had a career of ad- 
venture ; and both enjoyed the uncommon 
privilege of being fatuously loved by the people. 

* The satirist's experience of dungeons was inferior to the abbe's 
but he had been a prisoner of Sainte- Marguerite. 



"KING OF THE MARKETS." 141 

During many years, the market people of Paris 
refused as obstinately to believe in the death of 
Beaufort as did the peasants of the west of 
England in the death of Monmouth.* Ten 
years after the siege of Candia, where Beaufort 
unquestionably lost his life, the women of the 
markets were still having masses said, not for 
the repose of his soul, but for the prompt return 
of the man himself, f These persistent doubts, 
which, passing lightly over the necessity of 
proof, are always so easily propagated, have 
sufficed to place Beaufort at one era and 
Monmouth at another under the mask of 
Saint-Mars's perplexing prisoner. The points 

* These superstitions of the people are not peculiar to any age or 
country. The death of Mr. Charles Stuart Parnell is, I should sup- 
pose, pretty well attested ; yet there are those in Ireland who declare 
that the lost leader lives and will re-appear. Nay, by some it is 
maintained that he has re-appeared — and in a character somewhat 
plaguing to our fighting-men. Has he not been identified in print 
with that elusive De Wet of the Boer War who (at the time of 
writing) is leading our Generals such a dance among the mountains 
and passes of South Africa ! 

t Topin ! 



142 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

of resemblance cease here : the characters of 
the two men were totally dissimilar. 

Monmouth breathed the air of Courts as a 
prince should do. Beaufort, not less a prince, • 
floundered like a clown in the royal circle — the 
Tony Lumpkin of Versailles. Grandson of 
Henri IV. and Gabrielle d'Estrees (his father 
was Cesar de Vendome), Beaufort came up 
from the country to the Court, a raw, handsome 
braggart, with one hand incessantly on his hip, 
and the other twirling up his moustaches ; his 
conversation a ludicrous failure to mix the slang 
of the stable and the hunting-field, which was 
his proper language, with the jargon of the 
elegants, which was exotic to him. He got so 
far as to introduce a vocabulary of his own, 
which had no imitators, and which Cardinal de 
Retz declared would have melted Cato into tears. 
But the stentorian, lubberly Duke had his 
revenge at the wars, where his idiosyncrasies 
were " not noticed in him " ; and he returned 



"KING OF THE MARKETS." 143 

from Arras with a reputation for prowess in the 
field which rallied around him the courtiers by 
whom he had before been flouted. 

Indeed, he was presently in the way to 
become a strong man in the kingdom ; for, on 
the eve of the death of Louis XIII., we find 
Anne of Austria desirous of making him the 
guardian of her son, as " the most honest man 
in France." It was not a sagacious choice, for 
"the most honest man" was in truth one of the 
vainest, most unstable, and most incompetent. 
In no long time he is observed talking very 
loudly in the rebellious ranks of the Fronde, 
leader of the ridiculous party whose preten- 
sions obtained for them the nickname of Les 
Importants. A truculent, inglorious figure in 
the Fronde, he gave trouble enough to Mazarin 
to make it worth the minister's while to arrest 
him ; he was confined for a time in the State 
prison of Vincennes, and the Importants were 
dispersed. 



144 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

But Beaufort, for all his ambition, had no 
singleness or fixity of purpose ; he severed the 
ties of party as easily as he formed them, and 
the Fronde knew him no more. After a 
period of idle opposition to the young king, he 
was sent into banishment ; and returned to be 
reconciled to his old enemy, Mazarin. At no 
time was Beaufort a political adversary to be 
very seriously reckoned with. He had no 
real knowledge of affairs ; he could act violently 
at any time, but with judgment at no time ; and, 
wanting the ability to choose a course for 
himself in politics, he was pushed into one 
course and another by those whom he fancied 
he was leading by the ear. 

Outside the sphere of the populace of Paris 
— indeed, it was narrower ; it was the sphere 
of the markets — Beaufort did not possess the 
slightest influence ; and his authority over these 
people, whom he bullied and joked with in 
their own argot, was much more that of a 



"KING OF THE MARKETS." 145 

popular hero than of a political leader. He 
called the market people his subjects, and they 
in return dubbed him their king : he was the 
King of the Markets. The porters and fish- 
wives followed him in the streets, proud beyond 
measure of their debonnaire prince, who had 
condescended to choose his town house in the 
most populous quarter of Paris,* who would 
mount on a stone to hold an argument, or show 
off his strength in a public brawl. 

On a sudden, however, the factious Beaufort 
ranged himself and grew submissive. In 1663, 
being then at the sane age of forty-seven, he 
received an appointment as Admiral, in 
succession to his father. Lagrange-Chancel 
would have his readers believe that Beaufort 
made use of this office to traverse the designs 
of Colbert, controlling the navy ; but this proves 
quite inexact. The opposition to the throne 
was exhausted at this time ; the passions 

* Rue Quincampoix. 

IO 



146 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

kindled during the Fronde were extinguished ; 
submission to authority had become or was 
becoming the policy of those princes and nobles 
erstwhile the most restless and intractable. 
" The Prince de Conti married the niece of 
Mazarin ; the great Conde received from the 
King with gratitude the Order of the Saint- 
Esprit" ; and Beaufort, transformed into an 
Admiral, grew mild and malleable. On the 
quarter-deck, it is true, he swore and 
swaggered as of old, and was quite the pirate 
in the treatment of his officers, whom he was 
for ever threatening to pitch into the sea ; 
but in his naval expeditions he endured cheer- 
fully and with docility the authority of the 
expert whom Colbert had placed beside him. # 
It was his subordinates only who felt the 
natural violence of his character ; the Court 
had nothing to fear from him. Far from 
choosing even to pretend himself dangerous, 

* Relation de Gigdiyfaite au Roi par M. de Gadagne, lieutenant-gdneral. 




FRANCOIS DE VANDO, 



Due de Beaufort Pair dcFv.uice.Poi 



Francis de Vendome, " Roi des Halles.' 
From a contemporary print. 



"KING OF THE MARKETS:' 149 

Beaufort had gone over, with characteristic 
ostentation, to the side of the young King and 
his advisers ; and had he pretended danger, 
his gifts as a conspirator were too mediocre 
to excite alarm. At his proudest and most 
powerful, he was no more than the King of the 
Markets — le Roi des Halles. 

The hypothesis which lifts Beaufort to the 
dignity of the Iron Mask rests on the 
assumption that his popularity threatened the 
safety of the State. He was given, in 1669, 
the command of the expedition to Candia, to 
the end, it was said, that he should return 
no more. He did not, it was said, die at 
Candia, as history has affirmed : from the 
midst of the fleet, and in the presence of the 
army, he was adroitly whisked away, and 
conveyed into the keeping of Saint- Mars, at 
Sainte-Marguerite. This is the story as we 
have it from Lenglet-Dufresnoy, Lagrange- 
Chancel, and Anquetil — three savants who 



VSo THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

took the field at an age not usually nimble 
in critical speculation or research. If, however, 
the facts brought forward as to Beaufort's 
popularity (considered as a source of danger to 
the State) possess any value, Louis XIV., it 
is clear, had not a reason in the world for 
ridding himself of the Duke. But Beaufort 
did certainly disappear at the siege of Candia. 
Was he killed there, or was he carried thence 
into captivity ? We have no proof whatever 
that he was carried away. Have we, then, the 
proofs of his death ? 

On the 5th of June, 1669, the expedition 
for the relief of Candia, besieged by the 
Turks, set out from Toulon, with Beaufort 
in command ; and on the morning of the 
19th the western point of the island was 
sighted. In the evening, under cover of 
darkness, Beaufort, with Navailles (general 
of the 7,000 French troops who had sailed 
with the fleet), made for the shore 



"KING OF THE MARKETS." 151 

with muffled oars, and succeeded in reach- 
ing the port. They soon convinced them- 
selves of the desperate condition of the 
Venetian defenders of the place. In fact, 
of the 14,000 whom the ambassador of the 
Venetian Republic had reported to be within 
the walls, there were not above 6,000 who 
could be relied upon as combatants ; and 
most of these had lost heart during a defence 
which was now regarded as hopeless. 

A council of war was held on the 20th, 
when Beaufort, Navailles, the Captain-General 
of the Venetians, and the other officers who 
took part in it, were unanimously agreed 
that a resolute sortie offered the sole pros- 
pect of success. The final plan of this was 
settled on the evening of the 24th, and its 
execution resolved upon for midnight of the 
25th. By that hour, the whole of the 
French troops had been safely brought on 
shore. The one hope lay in taking com- 



152 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

pletely by surprise the swarming legions of 
the Turks. The troops of the Venetians, 
useless at present within their bastions, were 
not advised of the project of attack until 
one o'clock on the morning of the 26th, 
when, roused from sleep by their officers, 
they were hurried in silence to their posts. 

The French foot were marshalled on the 
esplanade, where as the hour of two sounded 
from the church of Saint-Marc, they were 
joined by two hundred of the King's 
musketeers and five companies of cavalry. 
Navailles and his men moved off towards 
the right, Beaufort directing his march 
upon the left : the two corps were to re-unite 
at a signal given by Navailles. Arrived 
within a little space of the enemy, Beaufort 
made his troops lie down ; while Navailles, 
who had a larger distance to cover, con- 
tinued his stealthy advance. Some fifty 
minutes before the dawn, the drums of the 



"KING OF THE MARKETS." 153 

Turks startled the silence ; but a few of 
Beaufort's marines, creeping up to the camp, ' 
returned to say that the enemy were merely 
beating the reveille, and were still in total 
ignorance of their danger 

Navailles had got unimpeded to the ex- 
treme right, where he halted until his reserve 
and the rear guard had come up. Beaufort, 
with growing impatience, was waiting for 
the signal, when, suddenly, a roar of mus- 
ketry burst from the distant right, and the 
red fire glowed over the camp of the Turks. 
In an instant, Beaufort was on his feet, his 
men with him ; the charge was sounded ; and, 
while the day had not yet dawned, the troops 
leaped blindly to the assault. The Turkish en- 
trenchments were almost immediately stormed ; 
the Turks, panic-stricken, fired off their pieces 
and fled, many casting themselves headlong 
into the sea. It seemed as though victory were 
already with the French ; but just then a vast 



154 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

sheet of flame reared itself into the night, and 
a terrifying explosion shook the field. Beau- 
fort's troops and , marines, not knowing what 
had happened, halted in alarm ; and scarcely 
obeyed the rallying voice of their leader. 

Far other were the effects which that 
catastrophe had produced among the soldiers 
of Dampierre, who headed the detachment 
commanded by Navailles. A magazine con- 
taining twenty-five thousand-weight of powder 
had exploded, swallowing an entire battalion 
of the French guards, and spreading panic 
on every side. The troops, persuaded that 
the whole field was sown with mines, threw 
away their arms, and ran in all direc- 
tions. In the semi-darkness of that hour 
'twixt night and morning, Beaufort's marines, 
meeting the flying troops of Dampierre and 
Navailles, fell on them as foes ; and an indis- 
criminate and indescribable slaughter began. 
In vain did Beaufort, himself abandoned, 



"KING OF THE MARKETS." 155 

essay to undo that fatal error. Covered with 
blood, his horse wounded, he threw himself 
amid the terrified Frenchmen, crying: "A moi, 
mes enfants ! Je suis votre amiral. Ralliez- 
vous pres de moi ! " Brave, but futile effort I 
The dawn was growing, and the Turks realised 
that they were not pursued. Recovering their 
ranks as quickly as they had broken them 
they became in their turn the assailants ; and, 
shouting the Prophet's name, they chased the 
French to the gates of Candia. 

Under shelter of the ramparts, the French 
took a breathing space, and roughly summed 
their losses. Beaufort was missing. His 
death was considered certain by the army. 
He had been seen last, streaked with blood, 
and galloping on a wounded horse through 
that dense melee in which Frenchmen were 
killing Frenchmen as Turks. Any French- 
man who died obscurely on that half-lighted 
field might easily have been posed by his 



156 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

partisans as the hero of a mystery. But 
no one raises a hint of foul play in the case 
of Beaufort. The first despatch that reaches 
Colbert, from his brother Colbert de 
Maulevrier, signalises Beaufort's death as the 
most deplorable result of the battle.* And 
the army was not satisfied with the know- 
ledge that the leader of the expedition 
was missing. Was it possible the Turks 
had taken him ? A white flag was sent 
into the Turkish lines, but Beaufort was not 
among the prisoners. It was then held for 
certain that he had fallen, an easy mark 
on horseback, among the lost files of the 
French whose death was never questioned ; 
and not a hint or a line that has come 
down to posterity has disturbed this belief. 

The dates alone should suffice to dis- 
prove the case of Lenglet-Dufresnoy and 

* Manuscrits de la Bibliotheque impe'riale, papiers Colbert : cited by 
Topin. 



"KING OF THE MARKETS:' 157 

his two adherents. Was the Man in the 
Mask a nonagenarian ? Beaufort was born 
in 16 1 6, and the prisoner of Saint-Mars 
died in the Bastille in 1703. And how 
does Saint-Mars receive Beaufort a prisoner 
at Sainte-Marguerite in 1669 — eighteen years 
before he goes to that fortress ? 



'58 



CHAPTER VII. 

Endless indeed has been the per- 

The Tragedy 

of Nicolas verse ingenuity of writers on the 
pouquet. su bject of the Iron Mask. That 
Nicolas Fouquet, Louis XIV.'s overweening 
Superintendent of Finance, died at Pignerol, 
March 23, 1680, is an historical fact which 
does not admit of question or of doubt ; 
yet Paul Lacroix (the bibliophile Jacob, a 
voluminous and entertaining author), not con- 
tent with the nineteen years of captivity 
which fate decreed the afflicted Surintendant, 
sentenced him to twenty-three more as the 
Man in the Iron Mask. 

Not that this folly was quite original with 
the bibliophile. It glimmered first in an 



TRAGEDY OF NICOLAS FOUQUET. 159 

article published, in 1789, in a journal called 
Loisirs dun patriot* frangais ; I republished 
afterwards as a pamphlet, and sold to a 
confiding public under the title, V Homme au 
masque de fer, dcvoile dapres une note 
trouvee dans les papiers de la Bastille. The 
remarkable " note found among the papers 
of the Bastille " has long gone to keep com- 
pany with the legend of the silver plate 
and the linen shirt ; for neither Paul Lacroix 
nor anyone else succeeded in proving its 
existence, and the bibliophile prudently 
abstains from giving it a place of honour 
among his documents. Here it is, for the 
entertainment of the curious : — Fouquet, 
arriving from the Isles of Saint e- Marguerite 
in an iron mask. The note carried the 
good round number, 64,389,000, and a double 
signature — the letters XXX superposed 
on the name Kersadiou. The author of the 
jest elected to remain in an obscurity which 



160 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

is and always has been destitute of interest. 
The erudition and inexhaustible versatility of 
Lacroix, from whose pen we have a little 
library of volumes on the curiosities of French 
history, were idly and unworthily employed in 
reviving, in i84o, # a fable which had died in 
the hour of its birth, sixty years earlier. 

The downfall, degradation, punishment, and 
death of Fouquet make an episode as striking 
and poignant as any in the reign of Louis XIV. 
He was at his height of power, the most daz- 
zling figure at the Court, just when the King, at 
the age of twenty-three, had resolved to rule 
France alone. At the first Council he held 
after the death of Mazarin, Louis had said : 
" I shall be my own Prime Minister in 
future " ; f and the Court, incredulous at first, 
soon realised that the King meant to keep 
his word. Already devoted to pleasure and 

* V Homme an masque defer. (Paris, Mayen, 1840, in 8vo). 
t "y<? serai a Vavenir mou premier ministre.'''' 



TRAGEDY OF NICOLAS FOUQUET. 161 

the chase, he began now to show himself 

energetic and vigorous in affairs ; and from 

this time forward, during the ensuing fifty 

years, he devoted five hours a day to the 

business of the State. So long as Fouquet 

was indispensable, Louis retained him in his 

post ; and that over-confident, rash minister 

promised himself the Chancellorship and the 

real government of France. But, though he 

would not see it, and was deaf to the warnings 

that reached him, Fouquet was very soon 

upon the brink of ruin. The fortune he had 

amassed out of the taxes was probably at 

this time the most considerable in France. 

Colbert, however (Fouquet's arch enemy), 

conveyed to the King the secret of a hoard of 

nearly eighteen millions of ready money, left 

by Mazarin. Search was made and the money 

found ; and Louis, independent of Fouquet 

from that moment, resolved forthwith upon his 

overthrow. Along with the King's incense- 

ii 



1 62 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

ment went a certain fear of the dazzling and 
fascinating minister, who was capable, as Louis 
imagined, of impeding if not of thwarting his 
schemes for the government of France after his 
own manner. During a summer of splendid 
fetes at Fontainebleau, to which the opulence 
of Fouquet contributed, the plot against him 
was elaborated by Louis, whose natural gift 
of dissimulation had ripened under Mazarin's 
tuition. Had Fouquet been merely Superin- 
tendent of Finance, he could have been 
attacked and destroyed at once ; but as 
Procureur- General he enjoyed the protection 
of the Parlement. The King and Colbert 
had recourse to a stratagem to induce him 
to resign his office of Procureur-General ; 
he did so, or rather he sold the office ; and 
Louis exclaimed exultingly : " Tout va bien ; 
il s'enterre de lui-meme ! " * Stripped of the 
shield of the Parlement, Fouquet was at the 

* " Good ! He's digging his own grave." 



TRAGEDY OF NICOLAS FOUQUET. 163 

King's mercy, and on the 5th of September, 
1 66 1, the blow fell. He was arrested in the 
Place de la Cathedrale at Nantes, whither Louis 
had gone to meet the Estates of Brittany. 

11 The formation of a special court to try 
him, the length of his trial, which lasted three 
years, the obvious falseness of most of the 
charges, the influence exercised by Louis over 
the judges, the courage and ability shown by 
the prisoner, his intimate relations with all 
the ablest men of the day, his numerous and 
varied interests, all combined to focus the 
interest and the sympathy of France upon 
Nicolas Fouquet." * 

Sympathy rose higher when it became 
evident that Louis had determined to ob- 
tain a conviction at any cost. It was "a 
seventeenth-century Warren Hastings trial." 
Fouquet was accused of " corruption and 
dishonesty in the management of the finances, 

* Hassan's "Louis XIV." 

II* 



1 64 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

of appropriating to himself public money, of 
preparing to revive civil war in France, and 
for that purpose of fortifying Belle-isle." The 
accusation of treason was ridiculous, but the 
charges of malversation were easily estab- 
lished. The truth is that, with rare intervals 
of sound administration, the financial system 
was rotten and immoral throughout the whole 
period of the monarchy, and later. Mazarin 
might have been impeached on this count as 
justly as Fouquet, who was not more un- 
scrupulous than the majority of his contem- 
poraries in the handling of public money. But 
Fouquet fell, as Louis intended he should 
fall. Nor was it enough for Louis to have 
broken and dishonoured him : the King's 
treatment of the sentence decreed by the 
judges was an anticipation of the chastisement 
with which, eighteen years later, he was to 
visit the Iron Mask. The judges were in 
favour of banishment ; but the young sove- 



TRAGEDY OF NICOLAS FOUQUET. 165 

reign, just entering upon the splendid heritage 
of France, holding in his hands a power 
tremendous enough to inspire generosity, and 
at an age when the hey-day in the blood 
should cry pity upon all misfortune, deliberately 
changed the sentence into one of perpetual 
imprisonment. Fouquet the magnificent, 
whose lordly motto had been, Quo non 
Ascendam ! Whither may I not ?7tount ! 
sank into the shades of a dungeon. Once 
lodged in Pignerol, he never quitted it. 

The system of Lacroix rests almost entirely 
on the assumption — a perfectly gratuitous one 
— that Fouquet's death at Pignerol was 
simulated. Thus, after leaving his victim in 
prison for nearly twenty years, and after 
having, towards the close of that period, 
eased his bonds considerably, Louis, for some 
cryptic reason which history has not pene- 
trated to this day, suddenly gives him out 
as dead, separates him from the rest of the 



166 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

world, binds a mask over his features, and 
holds him in this double captivity twenty- 
three years longer. The death of Fouquet 
in 1680, says Lacroix, " is far from being 
certain." Let us see. 

And first it is to be observed that the 
captivity of Fouquet was for many years an 
extremely rigorous one. He endured it with 
great fortitude, spending much time in the 
study of works of devotion, and committing 
his thoughts to paper when he could get 
leave to write. Between the years 1665 and 
1672, says Topin, all communication with 
the outer world was forbidden him ; he 
might not even send a message to his family. 
All at once the King begins to soften a little. 
At first, in 1672, a rare letter is permitted; 
then a more regular correspondence, and 
freedom of intercourse with other captives 
and inmates of the fortress ; finally, there is 
the visit and prolonged stay at Pignerol of 




Nicolas Fouquet. 
From an engraving by C. Mel Ian. 



TRAGEDY OF NICOLAS FOUQUET. 169 

certain members of Fouquet's family. The 
despatches are open. 

On the 20th of January, 1679, the minister 
Louvois wrote to Saint- Mars : — 

" His Majesty is quite willing [trouve bon] 
that M. Fouquet and M. de Lauzun * should 
see each other as often as they please. They 
may, if they choose, pass the day together, 
and take their meals together. You are at 
liberty to join them. They may have leave 
to exercise at all times, not only within the 
limits of the dungeon, but in any part of the 
citadel. You can take them to dine with 
Madame de Saint- Mars as often as you like, 
even when strangers or officers of the town 
are present . . . . His Majesty accords 
permission to the officers of the citadel to 
visit your prisoners and pass the morning 

* De Lauzun, a captain in the King's guards, the hero of many 
extraordinary adventures, and one of the most impudent little cox- 
combs in France, was ten years in prison at Pignerol. He had already 
had a taste of the Bastille, for an insolent speech to Louis XIV. 



170 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

or afternoon with them, should they wish it, 
one of your own officers being present. 

With regard to the governor 

and residents of the town, you will act as you 
think proper in respect of visits to be paid 
by them." 

Still more important and explicit is the 
minister's letter of the ioth of May: — 

" The King, having granted permission to 
Madame Fouquet, her children, and M. 
Fouquet of Mezieres,* to visit M. Fouquet 
at Pignerol, I have his Majesty's command to 
advise you of the same, and further to inform 
you that Madame Fouquet is to have the 
fullest liberty of intercourse with her husband, 
and even, should she desire it, to take up her 
residence in M. Fouquet's apartment. As 
regards the children and M. Fouquet's 
brother, his Majesty desires that they may 
be with him as much as they please, without 

* Fouquet's brother. 



TRAGEDY OF NICOLAS FOUQUET. 171 

the presence of any of your officers. The 
same liberty is to be accorded to Salvert, 
Madame Fouquet's man of business. You 
may give leave also to the senior officers of 
the town garrison and of the citadel to visit 
your prisoners." 

In the month of June, Louvois authorises 
the visit of certain " dames de qualite " 
of Turin. In November he permits another 
brother of Fouquet to take up his residence 
at Pignerol for twenty-four months, and to see 
the prisoner " as often as he pleases during 
that period." 

Lastly, on the 18th of December, Fouquet's 
daughter has leave to lodge in the dungeon 
itself, in a chamber divided only by the dis- 
tance of a single step from her father's. 

And it is in these circumstances, in the 
immediate presence of a numerous family — 
under the very eyes, we may say, of a wife, 
a son, a daughter, and two brothers — with 



172 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

Madame's man of affairs at hand, with 
officers and people of the town and garrison 
coming and going as they list, that Paul 
Lacroix has the temerity to speak of a 
simulated death of Fouquet, the 23rd of March, 
1680! The time was not exactly in joint for 
a plot of that sort. Is it a schemer so astute 
as Louis XIV. (at this date forty-two years of 
age) who sends Fouquet's whole family to join 
him at Pignerol, gives his wife leave to share 
his chamber, lodges his daughter within a 
brick of him, and throws the prisoner's doors 
open to any visitors he may choose to 
receive, at the precise hour when his Majesty 
is planning to report him dead, and to thrust 
him thereupon into greater secrecy than ever ? 
It is childish. And for what reason, this 
pretended death and this prolongation of 
Fouquet's captivity by three-and-twenty years ? 
The bibliophile whispers us of some secret of 
State of which Fouquet is the dreaded pos- 



TRAGEDY OF NICOLAS BOUQUET, 173 

sessor. So ! And this prisoner with the un- 
speakable secret is suddenly given the liberty 
of the citadel, he is set in the midst of his 
family, he is suffered, nay almost invited, 
to blab it in the ears of all the gossips of 
Pignerol who may come and call on him and 
stay to dinner just as often as he has a mind 
to company ? M. Lacroix, this was rating 
rather cheaply the intellects of Louis XIV. ! 

But the case against the bibliophile is not 
quite finished. Other documents ©f State, 
together with letters of the family, allow us 
to follow Fouquet for a space after his death 
from apoplexy on the 23rd of March, 1680. 
Saint-Mars sent immediately to Louvois. The 
family of Fouquet communicated the tidings 
to their friends, and wrote to the minister 
soliciting the King's permission to lay him 
in their vault in Paris. Madame de Sevigne 
writes to her daughter on the 3rd of April : 
" Poor M. Fouquet is dead ; I am very 



174 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

sorry." And on the 5th, " If I were in the 
counsels of M. Fouquet's family, I would see 
that they did not send his poor body on a 
journey, as I hear they propose to do." 
On the 6th of April, the Gazette de France 
makes the following announcement : " We 
learn from Pignerol that the sieur Fouquet 
has died there from apoplexy." 

On the 8th of the month Louvois replied 
to Saint-Mars, to the effect that he had in- 
formed the King of Fouquet's death, and that 
the King wished Fouquet's chamber to be 
prepared for Lauzun. His Majesty sends 
no message of regret. On the same day 
the Minister wrote to Fouquet's son, the 
Comte de Vaux : — 

" Monsieur, — 

" I am in receipt of your letter 
of the 29th of last month. I have spoken 
to the King concerning the request of your 






TRAGEDY OF NICOLAS FOUQUET. 175 

mother to remove the body of the late M. 
Fouquet from Pignerol. Rest assured there 
will be no difficulty about that ; his Majesty, 
has given the necessary orders." 

At the same time Saint-Mars received his 
instructions : — 

v" The King commands me to inform you 
that his Majesty consents to your delivery 
of the body of the late M. Fouquet to his 
widow, to be transported whither it may 
please her." 

The family possessed a vault in the chapel 
of Saint-Frangois de Sales, in the church of 
the convent of the Dames de Sainte- Marie, 
grande rue Saint-Antoine, Paris ; but it was 
not until the 23rd of March of the year 
following, 1 68 1, that the body of Fouquet 
was carried and deposited there. In the 
" registres mortuaires " of the church the 
record may be read : — 



176 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

" Le 23 Mars 1681, fut inhume dans 
notre eglise, en la chapelle de Saint-Fran- 
cois de Sales, messire Nicolas Foucquet, qui 
fut eleve a tous les degres d'honneur de la 
magistrature, conseiller au parlement, mattre 
des requestres, procureur general, surintendant 
de£ finances, et ministre d'Estat.'' 

Thus humbly, by leave of the King, whose 
anger had undone and destroyed him, was 
Fouquet the magnificent inurned in the 
church of the Ladies of Saint Mary, along- 
side the dust of his father. 

The principal hypotheses — most of them, 
as the reader has perceived, mere " springes 
to catch woodcocks " — have now been sub- 
mitted to analysis. Francois Ravaisson, 
keeper of the Arsenal Library, whose task of 
classifying the Archives of the Bastille has 
since his death been continued by M. 
Funck-Brentano, " believed for a moment " 



TRAGEDY OF NICOLAS FOUQUET. 177 

(says his successor) " that the celebrated 
prisoner might have been the young Count 
de Ke>oualze who had fought at Candia 
under the orders of Admiral de Beaufort. 
Ravaisson put forth his theory with much 
hesitation, and as, in the sequel, he was him- 
self led to abandon it, we need not dwell 
any longer upon it." 

M. Jules Loiseleur, in his charming series 
of Problemes historiques (1867) argued with 
force and brilliancy in behalf of a certain 
" prisonnier mysterieux " arrested by Catinat 
in 1 68 1. Marius Topin put Loiseleur out of 
court and countenance " by discovering 
Catinat in the very prisoner he was said to 
have arrested ! " 

General lung wrote a big and very in- 
teresting book * in support of the claims 
of one Louis de Oldendorf (known also as 

* La Verite stir le Masque de Fer. (Les Empoisonneurs). Paris : 
H. Plon, 1873. 

12 



178 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

Lefroid, de Kiffenbach, and the Chevalier 
des Armoises), a native of Lorraine, a spy 
and poisoner, arrested March 29, 1673, in 
connection with the celebrated " affaire des 
poisons." lung's work casts a broad light 
upon those " amazing poison-dramas " which 
remained for years among the obscurest 
problems of the reign of Louis XIV. ; but 
in the endeavour to identify Oldendorf with 
the Man in the Mask he failed completely. 
As his opponent, M. Lair, at once observed 
(and the point is emphasized by M. Funck- 
Brentano), " General lung did not even suc- 
ceed in proving that his nominee entered 
Pignerol, an essential condition to his being 
the Masque de Fer." 

These records, then, may once again be 
wiped from memory : Oblivion has looked 
upon them all. We have still to pluck the 
heart out of the mystery. 



PART II. 

THE MAN IN THE MASK. 



i8i 



CHAPTER I. 

Had Louis XIV. maintained in 

The Intrigue 

for Italy the sagacious policy of Riche- 
casaie. jj eu> there had never been a 
Man in the Iron Mask ! 

Victorious in 1631, that great minister 
in his prudence sacrificed most of the fruits 
of his victory ; restored Piedmont and Savoy, 
retaining only the stronghold of Pignerol, 
whereby he held always open a gate of 
northern Italy. To keep watch on Italy 
without alarming her ; to protect the rights 
of the small Italian princes, while not 
menacing their independence ; to require of 
them in return the fullest measure of con- 
fidence ; to thwart the Spanish plots, and 
suffer the Spaniards to draw upon them- 



i8 2 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK, 

selves all manner of Italian hatreds : in a 
word, to preserve an attitude passive but 
vigilant, firm but not threatening — such was 
Richelieu's judicious policy towards Italy. 

And to this policy Louis XIV. adhered, 
until, at about middle age, great in the 
reflected triumphs of his diplomats on the 
one hand, and of his invincible troops on the 
other, he looked upon himself, not without 
reason, as Europe's arbiter. Before the 
Treaty of Nimeguen had been signed in 
1678, his ambitious fancy had o'erleaped the 
Alps ; and in Louvois, his Minister of War, 
he found a willing and impetuous supporter. 
In Piedmont he possessed Pignerol, which, 
sufficient in the eyes of Richelieu, no longer 
contented Louis, who had imagined for him- 
self a great role in Italy. He would have 
done well to remember at this juncture that 
his authority beyond the Alps had been 
accepted in proportion as its aims had been 



THE INTRIGUE FOR C A SALE. 183 

disguised, and that there must come a change 
in the sentiments of the Italians when it was 
perceived that the moderate policy of Mazarin 
and Richelieu was to be superseded by the 
" military diplomacy " of Louvois. 

Among the kinglets sharing the pleasant 
territories of northern Italy at this era was 
the young Charles IV., Duke of Mantua, 
"the degenerate representative of that House 
of Gonzaga from which had sprung so many 
illustrious men, and which had allied itself 
with some of the foremost families of 
Europe." History depicts Charles as a rare 
gambler, rake, and spendthrift ; an absentee 
who seldom visited his little territory except 
to wring money from it ; a leader in the 
gaieties of Venice, where he was fast exhaust- 
ing in extravagant adventures the remnants 
of health and fortune. His revenues were 
spent before they reached him, and he 
was always in the hands of the Jews. In 



i8 4 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

fine, the young Duke was on the point of 
being up for sale — and Louis XIV. was not 
unwilling to become his purchaser. 

Separated from Mantua by the fair 
extent of the great plain of Lombardy was 
the Marquisate of Montferrat, a fertile and 
coveted tract which had been annexed 
to the Duchy of Charles IV. Of this region 
the capital was Casale, a fortified place, 
swept by the Po, and lying some fifteen 
leagues to the east of Turin. The district 
is rugged, and at this day almost untravelled, 
but Charlemagne had planted here an out- 
post of his empire. The walls of Casale 
" are still formidable, though the children 
race up and down their approaches unterri- 
fied ; and the castle and the citadel still re- 
echo to the clash of arms, as they have done 
for more than a thousand years. . . 
Palaces, too, may be found, if one care to 
look for them, and — best of all — broad shady 




Louis XIV. 
From an engraving after Fiter. 



THE INTRIGUE FOR CASALE. 187 

walks by the ancient bastions." * This 
Casale was a place of great strategical im- 
portance, above all for Piedmont : Turin had 
always eagerly desired it. That the Duke of 
Mantua, given over to his pleasures, should 
possess a footing in this neighbour-territory of 
Piedmont, mattered little to anybody : but that 
the King of France should establish himself 
there — this would be a serious concern for 
Turin. He was already master of Pignerol, 
and if the reader will glance at a map of 
northern Italy he will see at once that, master 
of Casale also, Louis would hold the Govern 
ment of Turin between two redoubtable fort 
resses. From Pignerol in the south-west, 
the passage of the Alps lay open to him ; 
at Casale in the north-east, he would stand 
upon the high road to Milan. And Casale 
was the object of the intrigue " mysteriously 
begun in 1676." 

* Justin H. Smith, "The Troubadours at Home," Vol. i. 



188 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

The minister of Louis at the capital of the 
Venetian Republic was the Abbe d'Estrades ; 
an able, restless, scheming man ; eager to 
commend himself to his master by some suc- 
cessful stroke of diplomacy.* No sooner was 
d'Estrades aware that Louvois had put 
Casale into the mind of Louis, than he 
began forthwith to make the project his 
own. Casale must be ceded to Louis, and 
d'Estrades was the man to contrive it. He 
knew how Charles of Mantua stood, how 
overpowering was his need of money, and 
how beggared his resources : he knew the 
character of Charles. The situation seemed 
as fortunate as fortunate could be. 

Further, it was well known to the Abbe 
that Charles was greatly in the hands of his 

* "The Abbe d'Estrades, Ambassador for a considerable time 
from Lewis the Fourteenth to the Republic of Venice, was son of 
Godfrey, Count d'Estrades, so long employed in negotiations and 
embassies in Holland, and who was one of the eight Marshals of 
France made upon the death of Turenne. Madame Cornuel called 
them ' La Monnoie de M. de Turenne.' " — Ellis. 



THE INTRIGUE FOR CAS ALE. 189 

favourites ; that the affairs of Mantua were 
more or less administered by them ; that 
Charles — so long as he were left to his 
gamesters, his women, and his wine-parties — 
was very prone to take their counsel in all 
things. Through one of these persons the 
young Duke might be approached. 

High among the favourites of Charles was 
Ercole Antonio Mattioli. Born at Bologna, 
the 1 st of December, 1640, Mattioli, a fore- 
most figure in Mantuan society, belonged to 
an ancient and distinguished family of lawyers. 
His grandfather, Costantino Mattioli, had 
risen to the rank of senator ; and one of his 
uncles, Hercule or Ercole Mattioli, a Jesuit 
father, was a noted orator. At the age of 
nineteen Ercole Antonio himself was a prize- 
man in civil and canonical law, and a little 
later he held a chair in the University of 
Bologna. Topin describes him as having 
won some repute in authorship. Having 



19© THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

allied himself by marriage with a senatorial 
family of his native town, Mattioli settled in 
Mantua, where his talents and his graces 
won him the patronage and support of 
Charles III., by whom he was ultimately 
appointed Secretary of State. The son and 
successor of Charles III. favoured him not 
less, and in this reign Mattioli was created 
Supernumerary Senator of Mantua, a dignity 
which carried with it the title of Count. 
" When he ceased to be Secretary of State," 
says Ellis, "does not appear; but he was 
clearly not in that office when he first, un- 
happily for himself, was involved in diplo- 
matic relations with the agents of the French 
Government." What is certain is that, al- 
though not at this date Secretary of State, 
Mattioli was wholly in the Duke's good 
graces, his companion in affairs of pleasure, 
and a counsellor in politics when Charles was 
minded to be serious. 



THE INTRIGUE FOR CAS ALE. 191 

Him the Abbe cTEstrades resolved to 
sound upon the affair of Casale. But before 
putting himself in direct communication with 
Mattioli, d'Estrades despatched to him one 
Giuliani, a roving Italian newsman, who 
tripped from town to town seeking things 
to publish in a sheet of which he was the 
editor. " A little editor of newspapers, in 
whose shop the letters of news are written," 
is the description given of him in a despatch 
from Venice to the minister Pomponne. 
Faring hither and thither on his proper 
business — Turin, Milan, Verona, Mantua, 
Venice — Giuliani was the man who could be 
used as a go-between, and no suspicion 
raised as to his movements. D'Estrades 
sent him to parley with Mattioli at Verona ; 
and this was the first real move in the 
game. 



192 



CHAPTER II. 

It is begun in the strictest secrecy. 
The Ripening Qn fa French side they were 

Plot. 

well aware that the occupation of 
Casale by troops of Louis XIV. could cer- 
tainly make little for the permanent welfare 
of Italy, while the advisers of Charles IV. 
were quite alive to the necessity of keeping 
the affair from the eyes and ears of the 
Spanish party intriguing in the Court 
of Mantua. They were opponents to be 
reckoned with. Charles's mother, Isabella 
Clara of Austria, who headed his council, 
and who was the real ruler in Mantua, was 
entirely pledged to the Spanish interests, as 
opposed to those of France. 

The situation is lucidly set out in the first 



THE RIPENING PIOT. 193 

long despatch of d'Estrades to Louis XIV., 
dated from Venice, December 18th, 1677.* 
D'Estrades had satisfied himself that Charles 
possessed " more talent and ambition than 
he was thought to have " ; that he would gladly 
get back the authority which had slipped 
into his mother's hands ; and that he had a 
rooted distrust of the Spaniards, who, as he 
believed, aimed at securing for themselves 
Casale and the whole Montferrat. These 
were the facts which gave d'Estrades to 
believe that the Duke would be not unwilling 
to place himself to some extent under the pro- 
tection of the French King. The despatch goes 
on to show why Mattioli had been selected as 
the agent to approach the Duke, and Giuliani 
as the agent to approach Mattioli. 

" I have thought," writes d'Estrades to 
Louis, " that I could not employ anyone in 

* We issue here upon that remarkable series of papers which Delort 
was the first to overhaul in the Foreign Office at Paris, and in which 
he found the beginnings of the true history of the Iron Mask. 

13 



i 9 4 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

this affair more proper to conduct it than a 
certain Count Mattioli, who is entirely devoted 
to that prince. I had known him for some 
time, and he had shown a great desire to 
render himself agreeable to your Majesty by 
some service. I knew that he had been 
Secretary of State to the late Duke of 
Mantua ; that the reigning duke had preserved 
much affection for him, and that he was well 
informed as to the different interests of the 
Princes of Italy. As, however, he had been 
much in the Milanese, and had had access to 
the Spanish ministers, I resolved not to place 
any confidence in him till I had put him to the 
proof. I accordingly charged the Giuliani to 
whom your Majesty was good enough to send 
a reward six months ago, and whose zeal for 
your service forbids all doubt of his fidelity, 
to observe Mattioli attentively, and in secret. 
Having been sufficiently informed of his ex- 
treme discontent with the Spaniards, who, 



THE RIPENING PLOT. 195 

after entertaining him with hopes, had always 
in the end abandoned him, I sent Giuliani, in 
the month of last October, to Verona, where 
he went under pretext of his private affairs." 

We may return to that month, and overhear 
the first overtures of Giuliani in an affair 
which was to bring about results terrible 
enough for Mattioli. Giuliani had been 
well primed by the abbe, and shows for his 
own part an emphatic interest in his mission. 
As d'Estrades had instructed him, he repre- 
sented to Mattioli that the friends of the 
Duke desired greatly to see him in a position 
of independence ; that all his territories and 
all his revenues were under the absolute 
control of his mother and the monk Bulgarini, 
her confessor, and that Casale and the Mont- 
ferrat were threatened by all manner of 
Spanish and other intrigues. 

To these hints Mattioli lent an open and 
a friendly ear. "He had long, with grief, 

13* 



196 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

seen the truth " of what Giuliani had laid 
before him, he said, but " there was still a 
remedy for so great an evil," and he would, 
with Monsieur 1' Abbe's approval, get speech 
of the Duke and "discover his real sentiments." 
All this was duly conveyed by Giuliani to 
d'Estrades, and by d'Estrades to Louis XIV. 

Next we are apprised of the " secret in- 
terview " which Mattioli had with Mantua, 
and then of the meeting between that prince 
and Giuliani. The Duke, says d'Estrades, 
" approved very much of the proposition that 
was made him, to free him from the perpetual 
uneasiness he felt on the score of the 
Spaniards, and that, for this purpose, Casale 
should be placed in your Majesty's hands, 
upon the understanding that I should try 
to obtain from you in his favour all that 
he could reasonably ask for." 

The Duke desired to communicate the 
matter to two of his counsellors, " in whom 



THE RIPENING PLOT. 197 

he had the most confidence," and he gave 
the selection of them to Mattioli. Mattioli 
named the Marquis Cavriani and Joseph 
Varano, " in whom he has confidence." The 
affair, it is evident, was already in a good 
train ; already there was talk of the preparation 
of " a draft of the plan." D'Estrades was 
now anxious for a personal interview with 
the Duke, and this, it was agreed, should be ' 
managed at Venice in Carnival time, when 
all the world, " even the Doge and the oldest 
senators," went masked. What the Duke de- 
sired above everything was that Louis should 
send into Italy a sufficiently strong army " to 
be able to undertake something considerable," 
— an army of which he wanted the general- 
ship, says d'Estrades, " in order to be con- 
sidered in Italy like the late Duke of Modena, 
and the late Duke of Mantua, who at his age 
commanded in chief the Emperor's army, with 
the title of Vicar-General of the Empire." 



198 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

Enclosed with d'Estrades's despatch was a 
letter from Mattioli to Louis,* in which he 
protests his devotion to him and to the 
interests of France. " For myself, I bless 
the destiny which procures me the honour 
of serving so great a monarch, whom I 
regard and revere as a demi-god." He 
undertakes to "transmit to your Majesty all 
that I shall learn respecting Casale, which 
has been fortified by one of the most skilful 
engineers of the Milanese." He entices the 
King with a hint of the great strength of 
the place. " I am convinced it would be 
useless in me to enlarge upon the importance 
of the fortress of Casale. Your Majesty 
must remember that at different times it has 
arrested the progress of many armies, and 
that it is the only bulwark upon which 
depends the loss or the preservation to the 
Spaniards of the territories of Milan ; terri- 

* December 14th, 1677. 



THE RIPENING PLOT. 199 

tories which, for more reasons than one, 
ought to belong to your Majesty's crown." 

To this Louis replies with his own hand, 
on the 1 2th of January, 1678 : — 

" I have seen from the letter you wrote 
me, as well as from what has been com- 
municated to me by my Ambassador, the 
Abbe d'Estrades, the affection you exhibit 
for my interests. You cannot doubt that 
I am greatly obliged to you, and that I shall 
have much pleasure in giving you proofs 
of my satisfaction upon every occasion." 

On the 24th of December, 1677, and on 
the 1st of January, 1678, we have despatches 
of d'Estrades to the minister Pomponne.* 
The Abbe has learned from the Duke of 

* " Simon Arnaud de Pomponne, Secretary of State for Foreign 
Affairs from 1 67 1 to 1679, when he was dismissed from his office, but 
retained the title of Minister of State, with permission to attend the 
Council. A man, like so many of his race, who united considerable 
talents to great excellence of character. Madame de Sevigne says, 
in speaking of the eminent station he had filled, that ' Fortune had 
wished to make use of his virtues for the happiness of others.' " — Ellis. 



200 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

Mantua that, should the French enter Italy, 
and should the Duke show a disposition to 
favour them, the Austrian party have deter- 
mined to seize Casale and all the Mont- 
ferrat. Mantua also is to be occupied. 
In these circumstances, the Duke, who is 
" watched by his mother, by the monk 
Bulgarini, who governs her, and by the 
greater part of his ministers," can neither 
declare himself openly on Louis's side, nor 
deliver up Casale to him, " unless he will 
send a sufficient army into Italy to secure 
that fortress." Further, " the Emperor and 
the Spaniards are ardently soliciting the 
Nuncios and the Ambassadors from Venice, 
residing at Madrid and Vienna, to persuade 
their masters to unite with them against 
France, and to represent to them that they 
have a common interest in the preservation 
of Italy, and in keeping out of it, the armies 
with which it is menaced." 



THE RIPENING PLOT. 201 

On the 1 2th of January, Louis writes ex- 
haustively to d'Estrades, commending his 
zeal in the business, and flattering Charles 
for the " noble resolutions he seems disposed 
to take." As for the citadel and fortress 
of Casale, should they be given up to him, 
Louis says, " I shall willingly content myself 
with holding them in the same manner in 
which I held them formerly ; that is to say, 
under the condition of preserving them for 
the Duke of Mantua, and of paying the 
garrisons I shall keep there. I would also, 
in order to favour the military inclinations 
of this Prince, take measures with him 
respecting the command of the armies I 
shall send across the Alps." 

Louis objects, however, to the Duke's price 
of one hundred thousand pistoles.* "You must 
make him understand that this sum is too 
large." As it was not convenient to Louis to 

* About ^"40,000 ; the pistole being equal to ten francs. 



202 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

send a considerable army into Italy that year, 
d'Estrades is instructed to protract the negotia- 
tions, and to " continue to entertain " the Duke 
with the notion that the French troops would 
shortly arrive in his territories.* Mattioli, as 
the principal confidant in the affair, is to be 
kept "always in good humour, by the assurance 
of the especial good-will I bear him for his 
conduct, and by the expectation of the proofs 
of it which I shall be inclined to give him." 

The main difficulty — indeed, almost the only 
one— was to protract the negotiations, for* 
everything was going so smoothly and so 
rapidly that, as d'Estrades writes to Pomponne 
on the 29th of January, there was no serious 
hindrance to be found or created. It was in 
the month of January that Mattioli began 
secretly to visit the Abbe at his house in 
Venice. The only point the Duke's agent 
seemed inclined to contest was the price to be 
paid for the occupation of Casale. At length, 



THE RIPENING PLOT. 203 

he proposed to d'Estrades a sum of 500,000 
livres, about ,£20,000. This was reducing the 
price by half, but d'Estrades was for a lower 
figure still ; and, eventually Mattioli, knowing 
his master's straits, was induced to accept an 
offer of 100,000 crowns. 

Taking the crown at a value of three francs 
(though it is all but impossible to determine 
the relative values of the moneys then in cir- 
culation), this would represent the trifling sum 
of £12,000. This, moreover, was to be paid 
only on conditions. " Finally, Sire, I brought 
him to content himself with one hundred 
thousand crowns ; and that on condition that 
your Majesty was not to pay them till after the 
treaty had been signed ; and then, if you 
choose not to give the whole sum at once, that 
the Duke of Mantua should receive fifty 
thousand crowns first, and the remaining fifty 
thousand three months afterwards." 

Everything else was agreed to " without 



2o 4 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

difficulty." Duke Charles, in fine, was in a 
hurry to conclude the affair ; being, says the 
Abbe, "in continual terror of the design, which 
he understands the Spaniards to have, of 
seizing upon his fortresses on the least pretext, 
and on the first favourable occasion." 

The next step was to arrange the meeting 
between Charles and d'Estrades, and nothing 
hindered this but the extreme secrecy with 
which the affair was being conducted. Charles 
had come to Venice in the last days of January, 
but the Spaniards were watching him, and it 
was not until the 13th of March, 1678, that he 
and the Abbe contrived their interview. We 
see them encountering at midnight, closely 
masked, " in a small open space," says 
d'Estrades in his despatch to Louis, " which 
is at an equal distance from his house and 
mine. I was an entire hour with him." The 
Duke was in a pressing haste to get the treaty 
ratified, from the fear that he was in of being 



THE RIPENING PLOT. 205 

" overwhelmed by the Spaniards." Money, 
money was his call : his supplies from the 
Spaniards were threatening to stop, and, 
lacking this support, he could not maintain the 
garrison of Casale. His sole trust, he said, 
was in France : When would Louis's troops 
appear in Italy ? He was tired of the slowness 
of despatches, and begged that Mattioli, in 
whom, says d'Estrades, "he has a blind con- 
fidence," might be sent to the French court, 
where his presence "may bring matters to a 
speedier issue." 

D'Estrades was put to a shift. He knew 
that Louis could not send in 1678 the army 
upon which Mantua was counting. He knew 
that the Duke, who was all for clinching the 
treaty, began to be uneasy at the length of the 
negotiations^ Balancing the issues, he decided 
to let Mattioli go to Paris. 



206 



CHAPTER III. 

But being still under the necessity 

The Treason 

of count of biding his time (for Louis, with 
Matuoii. t j le J3 utc h on his hands, could 

send no serviceable army into Italy), the 
Abbe had barely made this decision when 
he began to devise means to delay the 
departure of Mattioli. ' Here again fortune 
favoured him ; and the Duke was at this time 
so beset, harassed, and importuned by the 
Spaniards to declare himself against France, 
that Mattioli, fearful of leaving him, resolved 
to postpone his journey to France. This was 
in the third week of May (1678). On the 9th 
of July, d'Estrades advises Pomponne that 
Mattioli is to start almost immediately, and 



TREASON OF COUNT MATTIOLI. 207 

that he should reach Paris in September. 
" We have calculated the time together, and 
he cannot and ought not to leave his master 
sooner." Mattioli himself begins to be appre- 
hensive "that these delays may give a bad 
opinion of him " : they were, in truth, just what 
the French designs required. 

Towards the end of the month the Duke is 
in attendance on his Duchess-mother, ill of 
a fever. "If God should call her to Himself, 
the affair of Casale would without doubt be 
more easy to conclude." However, the lady 
lives ; and the affair continues to move. 
Mattioli does not cease to assure the Abbe 
that the Duke is " always firm in his design 
of putting himself under the protection " of 
Louis — of which, indeed, there was very little 
question. 

Still, Mattioli cannot get off to France. 
The Abbe himself precedes him thither : 
partly, it would seem, on a holiday, and partly 



208 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

in connection with the negotiations. He is 
succeeded at Venice by Pinchesne, from whose 
first despatch to Pomponne — September 3rd, 
1678 — we learn that Mattioli has been ill, but 
hopes soon to be able to commence his journey 
to the Court. Nine days later, it is Mattioli 
who writes concerning his illness to Louis, de- 
ploring the further delay it has occasioned him. 
" The eagerness I have is extraordinary, to be 
able with all possible celerity to throw myself 
at your Majesty's feet." 

It is the 29th of October before we know 
that he is actually off : Pinchesne has news of 
him, "written from Berheta on the 26th of this 
month." Meanwhile, as late as November 
1 8th, Paris has not yet beheld him. " Neither 
the Count Mattioli nor the Sieur Giuliani," 
writes Pomponne from Versailles, " is yet 
arrived here." At the end of the month 
Mattioli was really in Paris. 

No time was lost now in drawing to a close. 



TREASON OF COUNT MATT 10 LI. 2*9 

D'Estrades was already in Paris ; and with him 
and M. de Pomponne, Charles's minister had 
several interviews. A treaty was quickly 
agreed upon, of which the following were the 
chief stipulations : — 

1. That the Duke of Mantua should receive 
the French troops into Casale. 

2. That if Louis XIV. sent an army into 
Italy, the Duke of Mantua should be appointed 
generalissimo. 

3. That upon the execution of the treaty, the 
sum of one hundred thousand crowns should 
be paid to the Duke of Mantua. 

Altogether a wonderful bargain from the 
standpoint of the King of France. For a mere 
,£12,000 or so, he acquired a splendid fortress 
which, with the one that was already his at 
Pignerol, would enable him to control the 
destinies of Northern Italy. The Court may 
well have been astonished at the terms, and 
at the ease and rapidity with which the whole 

14 



2fo THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

affair had been concluded. Moreover, so skil- 
fully had it been contrived, on the part of 
Pomponne, of d'Estrades, of Pinchesne, and 
of the small number of the Duke of Mantua's 
abettors, that no whisper of the plot had 
reached the Duchess Dowager or any of her 
circle. 

Mattioli was admitted to secret audience by 
Louis, who presented him with a ring and a 
sum of money, and promised that his son 
should be a king's page, and that his brother, 
who was in the Church, should receive pre- 
ferments Mattioli then prepared to return 
to Italy. 

The secrecy which had been all along 
observed was still maintained. Pomponne, 
advising Pinchesne of the Italian's departure 
from France, bade him " keep the journey very 
secret." Varano, one of the two persons to 
whom the Duke of Mantua had confided the 

* Delort, Ellis, Topin. 



TREASON OF COUNT MATTWLI. 211 

design, was advised by Pinchesne that he had 
a letter for his Highness from France ; and 
Varano proposed .they should meet in mask 
at the opera. At about the same date (we are 
now in the closing days of 1678) Pomponne 
instructed Pinchesne that he was sending him 
a new cipher by courier ; and the old pre- 
cautions were kept up. 

" The courier whom I despatch to you 
has orders not to go to your house as a 
courier, but to enter Venice as a tradesman, 
or as a private French individual who goes 
there on his own business. He brings you 
a cipher, which you will employ only in 
what concerns the affairs of the Duke of 
Mantua. We have been afraid that, for 
so important a business, the cipher of the 
Abbe d'Estrades was too old, and had 
probably been discovered in the many times 
it passed through the territories of Milan." 

The scheme having advanced thus far, 

14* 



212 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

Louis was now eager to see it to the end. 
The able Louvois, in whom Topin discerns 
the finest genius for organisation up to the 
era of Napoleon, rapidly prepared the whole 
plan of action. A strong body of troops, 
placed under the command of the Marquis de 
Boufflers, Colonel General of Dragoons, was 
assembled at Briancon, ready to pass the 
frontier. Baron d'Asfeld, Colonel of Dragoons, 
set out for Venice, with a commission to 
exchange the ratification of the treaty. Catinat, 
then Brigadier of Infantry,* went " dans le 
plus grand mystere" to Pignerol, where he 
was to conceal himself in the fortress, and 
to take for the time being the name of 
de Richemont. The first despatch of Louvois 
to Saint-Mars concerning this affair has refer- 
ence to the coming of Catinat. It is dated 
from St. Germain-en-Laye, Dec. 29th, 1678. 

* Afterwards the celebrated Marshal. Voltaire says of him that he 
united philosophy to great military talents. 



TREASON OF COUNT MATTWLL 213 

" These few words are to inform you that 
it is necessary for the King's service that 
the person from whom you will receive this 
should enter the citadel of Pignerol, unknown 
to anyone. With this in view, let the Safety 
Gate * remain open until night-fall, and send 
him one of your servants ; or better, if you 
are able, go yourself to meet him at the 
spot to which his valet will conduct you, in 
order that he may pass into the citadel and 
dungeon in your suite, without being observed 
by anyone." 

Louis had already written to the Duke of 
Mantua : — 

" My Cousin, — 

" The Count Mattioli will instruct you so 
particularly, both as to the manner in which 
he performed the orders with which you 
charged him for me, and as to the extreme 

* Porte de Secours. 



2i 4 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK, 

satisfaction with which I have received his 
assurances of your zeal for my interests, that 
I can have nothing further to add upon these 
subjects. I am only desirous of stating that 
I wish you to place entire confidence in my 
friendship. You may promise yourself that it 
will be both useful and glorious to you upon 
all occasions, and you may always rely 
securely upon my alliance. I hope to be able 
to give you in the end unmistakable proofs 
of this. Having testified to you the satis- 
faction which the conduct of Count Mattioli 
has afforded me throughout the whole of this 
affair, I will add only that I pray God to 
have you, my Cousin, in His high and holy 
keeping. 

" Written at Versailles, this 8th Dec. 1678. 

" Louis, 
[and under the King's 



signature], 



Arnaud." 



TREASON OF COUNT MATT 10 LI. 215 

D'Asfeld arrived in Venice on the 21st of 
January, 1679, and at once communicated his 
orders to Pinchesne ; but nothing could be 
agreed upon until Mattioli came, who was still 
journeying slowly from Paris. They were, 
however, resolved to persuade Charles of 
Mantua to be at Casale by the 20th of Feb- 
ruary, to make the exchange of the treaty, 
and to prepare for the entry of the French 
troops. On the part of the French, in fine, 
all was now impatience where before it had 
been anxiety for delay. There was sufficiency 
of reason for this, since the massing of 
Louis's troops on the frontier must soon alarm 
the House of Austria ; and, in fact, the march 
towards Pignerol had begun in the last days 
of January. But just as, when the nego- 
tiations were at an early stage, they advanced 
too rapidly for the pleasure and convenience 
of Louis, so now, when everything was in 
readiness on the French side, and Louvois's 



2i6 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

plans were actually in execution, delay arose 
upon delay beyond the frontier. 

On reaching Italy, Mattioli was again 
smitten with fever, but he managed to see 
Pinchesne and d'Asfeld in the first week of 
February. Then it appeared that the Duke 
could not possibly go to Casale earlier than 
the ioth of March. He alleged, through 
Mattioli, (i) a want of money ; (2) the fear 
he had of leaving behind at Mantua Don 
Vincent Gonzaga, his heir presumptive,* at 
so critical a juncture ; and (3) " the obligation 
he found himself under of holding a sort of 
carousal with several Venetian gentlemen." 
Pinchesne, in excusing to Pomponne the 

* ' ' Vincent Gonzaga, Count of St. Paul, afterwards Duke of 
Guastalla, was descended from a younger son of Ferrant II., first Duke 
of Guastalla. After contesting for many years his right to that 
Duchy with Ferdinand Charles IV., Duke of Mantua (during which 
they were both merely made use of, by turns, as the instruments of the 
French and Austrian domination), he was finally successful in estab- 
lishing himself at Guastalla in 1706, where he died April 28th, 1714." 
—Ellis. 



TREASON OF COUNT MATTIOLI. 217 

apparent triviality of the third of these rea- 
sons, thinks that, after all, the spectacle of 
his Highness dallying with his pleasures in 
a season of political unquiet, may assist to 
draw off the suspicions which are beginning 
to gather about him. In any event, Charles 
was clearly bent upon keeping his engage- 
ment with Louis. 

But the need of swift, decisive action did 
not diminish. " Meanwhile, Sir," runs a 
despatch of Pinchesne on the 18th of Feb- 
ruary, " I think it right to inform you that 
the march of the troops to Pignerol, and the 
munitions and money that are carried there, 
cause genuine alarm in all Italy. It is even 
publicly stated here that the King has some 
great design, albeit no one can say what it 
is ; suspicion falling now upon Casale, now 
upon Geneva, and now upon Savoy, but more 
particularly upon the Republic of Genoa, by 
reason of what has lately passed there. I 



218 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

even know that M. Contarini * has written 
in these terms to Venice." More than this, 
the Spanish Ambassador and the Abbe 
Frederic, the resident of the Emperor, went 
to the Duke of Mantua and plainly told 
him " they had heard from Turin that he 
wished to give Casale and the Montferrat " 
to the King of France ; representing in 
strong terms " the disadvantages that would 
arise to all Italy from such an action, and 
particularly to the House of Savoy, on 
account of the Duchy of Milan." Charles 
denied it roundly, wondering how the gen- 
tlemen " could believe in reports of this 
nature " ; nevertheless, adds Pinchesne, " he 
is always in the intention of executing the 
treaty he has made with the King." 

But the circumstances were becoming tick- 
lish, and Pomponne deemed it well to be more 
pressing with Mattioli. Addressing him on 

* Ambassador from the Venetian Republic to the Court of Louis XIV. 



TREASON OF COUNT MATTIOLI. 219 

the 2 1 st of February, he wrote: "I have not 
failed to inform the King of your sorrow for 
the long delay over an affair which was begun 
and is to be concluded through your agency/' 
And he added with some significance : " His 
Majesty is still willing to promise himself suc- 
cess in this enterprise, and will entertain no 
doubt that the promise so solemnly given him 
is to be fulfilled." 

Pinchesne and d'Asfeld on their part con- 
tinued to ply him ; and towards the end of 
February it was arranged that d'Asfeld and 
Mattioli should go on the 9th of the following 
month to the village of Notre- Dame d'Increa, 
ten miles from Casale, there to make exchange 
of the ratifications ; while the Duke of Mantua 
should be at Casale " without fail" on the 
evening of the 15th, to wait for the troops of 
Louis (due to arrive on the 18th), and to put 
them in possession of the place. 

By this time alarums were shaking all the 



22o THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

north of Italy. From Turin, from Milan, from 
Mantua rumour, growing ever more definite, 
flowed in unceasingly. Suspicions, writes 
Pinchesne, were beginning to change into 
certainties that Charles of Mantua had made 
a treaty with Louis for the cession of 
Casale and the Montferrat. The Governor of 
Milan sends couriers flying to Madrid and 
Vienna to give intelligence to the Emperor and 
the King of Spain. " The courier to Vienna 
returned here * on Wednesday evening, with 
express orders to the Marquis Canozza, the 
Imperial Vicar in Italy, to speak strongly to 
the Duke of Mantua, and to deter him if 
possible, from doing a thing so contrary to the 
interests of the whole House of Austria; and 
to go afterwards to Turin and Milan, to 
concert there the means of preventing it, in 
case the news proved true." The Duke, who 
showed no disposition to break his engagement 

*To Venice. 



TREASON OF COUNT MATTIOLL 221 

with Louis, found excuses to keep the Imperial 
Vicar at arm's length. Pinchesne began to be 
in dread that the Spaniards, more and more 
jealous and distrustful, might oppose Charles's 
passage through the Duchy of Milan, and that 
of Mattioli, " whom they doubt as much." 

But it was not on the Duke of Mantua or on 
Mattioli that hands were laid. Like a 
thunderbolt the news fell upon Versailles that 
d'Asfeld had been arrested on his way to 
Notre- Dame d'Increa, and was held prisoner 
by the Governor of Milan* in the interests of 
the Spaniards. This was a check indeed ; and 
now at once the suspicions of the French 
began to fasten upon Mattioli, who had been 
the first to send the news of d'Asfeld's mis- 
fortune. Louis and his agents, it is true, were 
unwilling as yet to consider themselves be- 
trayed : the seizure of d'Asfeld might have 
been no more than an unlucky accident ; the 

* The Count de Melgar, Spanish Governor of the Milanese. 



222 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

affair might still be carried through. But there 
was no time to lose. The 24th of March had 
come, and Mattioli had not gone to Notre- 
Dame d'Increa and the Duke had not gone to 
Casale. D'Estrades (now Ambassador at 
Turin), the soul of the enterprise from the 
first, was sending courier on the heels of 
courier ; to Venice, for Pinchesne ; to Mantua, 
for the Duke ; and everywhere in Northern 
Italy for Mattioli. Acting upon the instruc- 
tions of Pomponne, the French agents in Italy 
were careful not to communicate to Mattioli 
their doubts of his good faith ; but d'Estrades 
wrote him a letter in which the mailed hand 
might be felt through the glove. 

" If," says the Abbe, " I had not been aware 
of your probity, and of your zeal for the 
interests of his Majesty, and for the welfare of 
the Prince to whom you are attached, I should 
have been seriously uneasy at the delay of our 
affair, which ought without fail, and at the 



TREASON OF COUNT MATTIOLI. 223 

latest, to have been concluded at the beginning 
of this month. But although we are already 
at the 24th, and all that you can desire on our 
part is in readiness, I cannot bring myself to 
think that his Highness's intentions and your 
own are other than they always were. You 
have so well understood how useful this affair 
would be to him at the present time, and how 
glorious in the future, and you have so ably 
represented this to him, that I cannot permit 
myself any suspicions on this head. Neither 
can I, when I reflect upon the very consider- 
able interest you have in completing an under- 
taking of such importance, the conclusion of 
which will be esteemed so great a merit on 
your part by the most generous and the most 
powerful King in the world, who has himself 
testified to you the good-will he bears you 

for it As his word has always 

been inviolable, you no doubt rely implicitly 
upon it ; you must be aware also how 



224 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

dangerous it would be to deceive him and 
that, after all the steps he has taken, and the 
measures he has agreed upon, you would 
expose his Highness and yourself to very great 
misfortunes if his Majesty had reason to think 
that faith had not been kept with him. ,, 

But March went out, and the treaty had not 
been ratified ; nor had Mattioli and the Duke 
kept their appointments. Versailles is all 
in profound uncertainty; as late as the 18th 
of April, we have Pomponne writing to 
Pinchesne — " It is still very difficult to dis- 
cover what is the real case with this affair, and 
whether the good faith that was to be desired 
in it has been kept. Try to discover this 
adroitly, but without showing any suspicions ; 
and be careful to inform me of everything that 
shall come to your knowledge on the subject." 
Writing again on the following day, the 
minister makes it sufficiently plain that his 
own suspicions of Mattioli's treachery are 



TREASON OF COUNT MATT10L1. 225 

confirmed ; and respecting the Duke, he 
says : " In truth, this Prince should not be 
allowed to think that it is permitted him to 
fail in a treaty he has made with his Majesty. 
If the occasion should present itself, make it 
appear to him that you cannot doubt his keep- 
ing the promises which have been made to 
the King." This suggests that, with or 
without Mattioli, it may still be possible, in 
the opinion of Versailles, to bring the scheme 
to an issue of success. 

In a moment that hope was extinguished 
and annihilated. Intelligence of everything 
that had taken place between Louis XIV. and 
Charles of Mantua was conveyed simultane- 
ously to the Courts of Turin, Madrid, Vienna, 
to the Spanish Governor of the Milanese., and 
to the Inquisitors of State of the Venetian 
Republic 

" To all, in a word, who were most inter- 
ested in opposing the execution of the project, 

15 



226 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

it was known point by point : the price of 
the cession, the date at which it was to^be 
made, the names of the negotiators. They 
knew everything, because they had received 
at sundry times the confidences of the prin- 
cipal and best-instructed among the actors in 
the intrigue — of Count Mattioli himself." * 

It was true — Mattioli had played the traitor. 
He had sold his master ; he had sold and 
made a jest of the Omnipotence of France. 

* Topin. 



227 



CHAPTER IV. 

" Never was seen," exclaims Pom- 

The Vengeance . 1 i r i 

ponne, in a despatch ot the 

of •• the Most r r 

Generous" 3rd of May, " so signal a piece 
of perfidy ! " 
Maria Baptista of Nemours,* Duchess and 
Regent of Savoy, and one of her ministers, 
President Turki, or Trucci, were the first 
who had received the confidences of Mattioli. 
To the Duchess he had shown the original 
documents of the negotiations, of which she 
had taken copies: facts which she herself com- 
municated to Louis XIV. Mattioli had seen 
the President at Turin. He had given in- 
formation to the Spaniards, and had accepted 

* Mother of Victor Amadeus II., at this time a minor. 

15* 



228 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

a cipher from the Spanish Governor of 
Milan. He had had secret interviews with 
one of the Inquisitors of State at Venice. 
All this, with sundry pleas and glosses, 
Mattioli afterwards confessed to Catinat.* 

The real motive or motives of this whole- 
sale treason will never be clearly known, for 
they were never divulged by Mattioli ; and 
we have little choice but to acquiesce in the 
general conclusion, which is — in M. Funck- 
Brentano's words — that he had cynically be- 
trayed both his master and Louis XIV., in 
order to reap a double harvest of gold. 
Topin asks generously whether this '¦ gross 
cupidity " is the sole explanation; and sug- 
gests that, " shaken to his soul, and illumined 
by the sudden apparition of his country in 
danger," Mattioli in remorse may have fallen 
back upon the one and only means of check- 
ing the advance of Louis. But this palliative, 

* Catinat to Louvois ; May ioth, 1679. 



"THE MOST GENEROUS" KING. 229 

well as it becomes its author, is not easy 
of acceptance ; for the conduct of Mattioli, 
after his return from France, bears every 
appearance of trickery and duplicity. If he 
designed to save Italy from Louis, he hid 
his project from his master, the Duke of 
Mantua ; and he certainly did not return, as 
he should have done, the French King's 
presents. These are Topin's own admissions, 
and he has manifestly little faith in the 
hypothesis which his good-nature propounds. 
Mattioli had presumably acted with his 
eyes open, but he seems to have taken no 
measures for his own safety in the event ot 
detection ; and the discovery of his treason 
had left him in a terrible situation. Charles 
of Mantua repudiated him, declaring that he 
had never authorised any negotiations for the 
sale or occupation of Casale. But Charles 
the insouciant was scarcely a dangerous 
enemy ; and it is probable that, while he 



2 3 o THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

might be willing to assist in his punishment, 
Mattioli had not much to fear from him. 
His real danger lay elsewhere. D'Estrades 
had beheld with feelings of mortification and 
intense bitterness the failure of a project in 
which he had had from the first the closest 
personal interest. The details were his, the 
negotiations had been begun by him, he it 
was who had selected Mattioli, and it was 
by him that Mattioli had been introduced at 
the Court of France. Louvois, for his part, 
had been baffled in the execution of the 
plans he had so adroitly laid ; and a French 
minister beaten at his own game of intrigue 
by an Italian adventurer was little likely to 
find himself in the humour of forgiveness. 
D'Estrades and Louvois, moreover, had acted 
not for themselves but for their master the 
King ; and when the projects of Kings are 
confounded their ministers are very apt to be 
held blameworthy. 




O be 



"THE MOST GENEROUS" KING. 233 

But there was a vengeance infinitely more 
to be dreaded than that of either Louvois or 
D'Estrades. Mattioli had drawn upon himself' 
the resentment, the implacable resentment, 
of Louis XIV. True, Louis had not at this 
time lost all hope of securing Casale ; but, 
for the immediate present, it was not Casale 
that filled his thoughts : it was the unspeak- 
able, the incredible effrontery of the man 
who had outwitted, cheated, and flouted him 
in the face of Europe. Europe was ringing 
with the discomfiture of Louis ; Europe was 
silently laughing at the Grand Monarque. 
It is necessary to recall his position among 
the Powers of that day, the splendid successes 
that had attended his arms, and his almost 
dictatorial attitude towards the Sovereigns 
his contemporaries, in order to appreciate 
the extent of the humiliation which Mattioli's 
treachery had brought upon the King of 
France. " The most generous " King was 



234 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

d'Estrades's description of him. It was the 
unlucky fate of Nicolas Fouquet to submit 
to the test the generosity of Louis XIV. 
towards one whom he feared even in defeat. 
" Let us be content with banishing this man," 
Fouquet's judges had said. " No," said the 
King: "he shall end his days in prison." 
And that was in the green tree, and it was 
now the dry : Louis was in his forty-first 
year. Again, what was Fouquet's offence 
in comparison with that of Mattioli ? Fou- 
quet had enriched himself at the State's 
expense, and he had courted and had won 
a popularity which fretted the King's com- 
placency. But he had not broken faith with 
Louis, he had not contemptuously bartered 
his interests, he had not openly made light 
of that jealous and sensitive dignity — he had 
not given Europe the opportunity to smirk 
over the humbling defeat of a Roi Soleil. 
Fouquet, for his popularity in Paris, died 



"THE MOST GENEROUS" KING. 235 

an old, sick man, in the dungeon of Pignerol. 
What fate should Mattioli look for ? 

Abbe d'Estrades was to have the pleasure 
of suggesting it. He proposed to Versailles 
that Mattioli should be seized, abducted, and 
imprisoned " at the King's pleasure." Illegal 
arrests and imprisonments were not extra- 
ordinary in France at any date before the 
Revolution ; but the case of Mattioli was 
unusual. He was, as Ellis says : " actually 
the plenipotentiary of the Duke of Mantua, 
for concluding a treaty with the King of 
France." Although his treachery was known, 
it had not been proved against him ; and, 
from the standpoint of international law, it is 
not an argument that the Duke of Mantua 
was a prince of no political consequence. 
The proposal to seize and carry off his 
minister was, in the circumstances, a proposal 
of brigandage. But it came pat to Louis's 
purpose and intention of revenge. He saw 



236 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

the illegality of it ; but, if it could be effected 
without scandal, he asked nothing better. 
Absolute secrecy in the business of the arrest 
was all that he demanded — and his private 
authorisation to d'Estrades was modified only 
by this condition — "that you get him carried 
off without the least suspicion of scandal." 

Satisfied by d'Estrades upon this point, 
Louis sanctioned the kidnapping of Mattioli. 
He was to be conveyed to Pignerol, and 
kept there "in the strictest secrecy." "Look 
to it," ran the closing words of the King's 
order, " that no one knows what becomes 
of this man." 

This was followed by the despatch of 
Louvois to Saint-Mars at Pignerol, dictated 
by Louis, the tone of which is eloquent of 
the mood that inspired it : — 

" Saint-Germain, April 27th, 1679. 
" The King has sent orders to the Abbe 



" THE MOST GENEROUS" KING. 237 

d'Estrades to procure the arrest of a man with 
whose conduct his Majesty has reason to be 
displeased. I am commanded to acquaint 
you with this, in order that you may not 
hesitate to receive him when he is sent to 
you. You will guard him in such a manner 
that, not only may he have no communication 
with anyone, but that he may have cause to 
repent his conduct, and that no one may know 
you have a new prisoner. 

" De Louvois." 

Instructions in these terms imposed the 
necessity of a ruse ; but the Abbe d'Estrades, 
keen upon requitals, was ready there. 
Mattioli, whose subalpine shrewdness seems 
to have missed him at this highest crisis of 
his life, was quite unaware that Louis and 
his agents had unriddled him. He did not 
know that the Duchess of Savoy had sent 
to Versailles the copies of the papers he had 



238 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

shown her. His utter ignorance of the 
danger he stood in made it easy to set the 
trap that must catch him. 

Although vengeance was certainly the first 
motive of Mattioli's arrest, there was another 
which, if the negotiations for Casale were 
to be proceeded with, was not unimportant. 
The Varano who had all along been privy 
to the affair, had instructed d'Estrades, 
through the assiduous Giuliani, that the Duke 
of Mantua would go no further with it while 
Mattioli was at large. The Duke himself 
appears to have been averse from, or at all 
events not inclined to, a personal reckoning 
with the agent in whom he had implicitly 
confided ; but he was willing enough that 
Mattioli should be brought to book by any- 
body else. D'Estrades also learned from 
Varano that Mattioli had privately obtained 
Charles's signature to the treaty (for what 
reason, unless with an eye to blackmail, it 



"THE MOST GENEROUS" KING. 239 

is impossible to conjecture), and had kept 
the original document, with all other papers 
bearing on the negotiations. By what means, 
asked d'Estrades of Pomponne, were these 
likely to be secured, unless by the arrest of 
Mattioli ? That act, therefore, while gratify- 
ing the vengeance of Louis and his ministers, 
would render possible a renewal of the nego- 
tiations, and would be far from displeasing to 
the Duke of Mantua, whom it was desirable to 
retain in friendship. 

Mattioli was now again in Turin, where, 
as we have seen, d'Estrades was installed 
as French Ambassador ; he was still visit- 
ing the Abbe, and talking and acting as 
though he were as busy as ever in the 
matter of Casale. D'Estrades, with Nemesis 
in his heart, entertained him smoothly ; and 
affected always to believe that everything 
was secure. Through Giuliani, who was 
solid throughout in the interests of the 



2 4 o THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

French, d'Estrades learned that Mattioli was 
seeking money. His expenses in France, 
his journeys to and fro in Italy, and his 
bribes to win over the Duke's mistresses, 
had drained his purse. D'Estrades sug- 
gested a ready means of replenishing it. 
Catinat (he said), who commanded the 
French troops that were to take possession 
of Casale, was furnished, by the King's 
order, with ample means ; and was prepared, 
by the King's order, to meet every expense 
that might arise. Mattioli took the bait. 
'* Being one of the most consummate rogues 
that ever lived" ("Comme il est un des plus 
grands fripons qui ait jamais este "), wrote 
D'Estrades, " this hint of mine made him 
desperately eager to meet Catinat." 

Catinat was warned, and the meeting was 
arranged. It was to be at a spot " on 
the frontier towards Pignerol " — Catinat, said 
d'Estrades, not being able " to leave the 



"THE MOST GENEROUS" KING. 241 

neighbourhood where his troops were 
stationed." D'Estrades, not anxious to risk 
his skin, stipulated for " a few well-armed 
men " in Catinat's company : " as I know 
that Mattioli always carries two pistols in 
his pocket, and two others, with a poniard, 
in his belt." 

D'Estrades gave him rendez-vous at six 
o'clock on the morning of the 2nd of May, 
1679, at a church on the outskirts of Turin : 
they were to drive thence to the frontier. 
Unfriendly fortune led Mattioli to the meet- 
ing-place. For months he had failed in the 
appointments which it would have profited 
him to keep ; but he was punctual at the 
one fatal tryst of his life. D'Estrades had 
with him in his carriage a cousin, the Abbe 
de Montesquieu ; and in this company Count 
Mattioli set out for the frontier. 

There had been heavy rains for three 

days, and the streams of that wild region 

16 



242 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

were pouring over their banks. One of 
these, the Guisiola, not far from the spot 
where Catinat waited with his men-at-arms, 
the Abbe's party must cross ; but the bridge 
had been damaged by the flood, and the 
horses could only ford the stream by swim- 
ming. This, apparently, the Abbe, precious 
of his charge, declined to risk ; but it was 
possible to make the bridge safe for foot- 
passage, and to work they went — Mattioli 
himself, says d'Estrades, "helping so bravely, 
that in an hour we were able to get across.' ' 
The carriage was left behind, the Abbe 
congratulating himself on getting rid of his 
servants, "as this ensured us a greater 
measure of secrecy." The journey was con- 
tinued on foot, "dans des chemins fort 
mauvais " ; and Catinat, bearing in his hands 
the vengeance of Louis, awaited them at 
the chosen spot. " M. Catinat," writes the 
Abbe, " had made his arrangements so well 



"THE MOST GENEROUS" KING. 243 

that not a creature appeared with him. 
He led us into a room " ; and then, before 
the real object of the meeting was declared, 
d'Estrades adroitly and insensibly admonished 
Mattioli " respecting all the original papers 
belonging to our affair." Mattioli, who must 
now at last have begun to realise his 
danger, said that all the papers were in 
a box at Bologna, in the hands of his 
wife, who had retired to the convent of 
the Nuns of St. Louis. Upon this, deeming 
his presence not necessary in the scene that 
was to follow, d'Estrades withdrew, accom- 
panied by his cousin ; and Mattioli was left 
with Catinat. At two in the afternoon, 
Saint-Mars had him under lock in the dun- 
geon of Pignerol. 

Catinat's despatch to Louvois (Pignerol, 
May 3rd, 1679) is of soldier-like direct- 
ness: — "I arrested Mattioli yesterday, three 

miles from here, upon the King's territories, 

16* 



244 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

during the interview which the Abbe 
d'Estrades had ingeniously contrived between 
him, Mattioli, and myself, to facilitate the 
scheme. For the arrest, I employed only 
the Chevaliers de Saint-Martin and de 
Villebois, two officers of M. de Saint-Mars, 
and four men of his company. It was 
effected without the least violence, and no 
one knows the rogue's name, not even the 
officers who assisted. He is in the cham- 
ber which Dubreuil occupied, where he will 
be civilly treated, according to the request 
of the Abbe d'Estrades, until the wishes 
of the King with regard to him are 
known." * 

* "Finally," says M. Funck-Brentano, "we have a very curious 
pamphlet entitled La Prudenza trionfante di Casale, written in 1682, 
that is, little more than two years after the event, and— this slight de- 
tail is of capital importance — thirty years before there was any talk of 
the Man in the Mask. In this we read : ' The Secretary (Mattioli) was 
surrounded by ten or twelve horsemen, who seized him, disguised him, 
masked him, and conducted him to Pignerol ' — a fact, moreover, con- 
firmed by a tradition which in the eighteenth century was still rife in 
the district, where scholars succeeded in culling it." 



"THE MOST GENEROUS" KING. 245 

Among the papers taken on Mattioli's 
person were none of the series emanating 
from Versailles. These it was essential to 
secure ; they were the tangible proofs of 
Louis's failure. Mattioli had said they 
would be found at Bologna. They were 
not there. Under threats of torture and 
of death, the prisoner at length confessed 
that the original papers were at Padua, 
" concealed in a hole in the wall of a 
room, in his father's house." Thereupon a 
letter was dictated, in which, without a word 
that could betray his situation, Mattioli was 
made to request his father to deliver the 
documents to Giuliani. The father, suspect- 
ing nothing, handed them over : Pinchesne 
presently received them all ; and they were 
forwarded, with rigorous care, to Versailles. 

Louis XIV. was avenged. If he had 
received at the hands of the petty minister 
of a petty prince his first serious check 



246 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

in Europe, his retaliation had been swift 
and terrible. Nor did Europe enjoy for 
long the spectacle of the potent King's 
defeat. The guilty principal in the affair 
had already vanished from the sight and 
knowledge of men, into the entrails of 
Pignerol, and would be beheld of them no 
more. The official proofs of the aborted 
enterprise were not less secure under 
Louis's hands than was Mattioli in the 
wardenship of Saint-Mars. The French 
troops had been withdrawn as secretly as 
they had been assembled at BrianQon. The 
whole scheme was renounced so promptly 
that, in Topin's phrase, it seemed, in a 
manner, as though it had never been 
begun.* The Court of Savoy undoubtedly 

* Not, however, that Louis had really abandoned his project. He 
wanted it forgotten only until such time as he could accomplish it with- 
out possibility of failure. The negotiations were resumed two years 
later ; and on the 30th of September, 1681, the French troops were re- 
ceived into Casale. 



"THE MOST GENEROUS" KING. 247 

had a full knowledge of the intrigue ; 
"but Louis XIV. spoke with a master's 
authority at Turin." Mattioli had un- 
doubtedly made disclosures at Venice as 
at Milan ; but those beguiling lips were 
sealed eternally behind the bastions and 
demi-lunes of Pignerol. And the affronted 
King bore himself as high as ever. He 
demanded and obtained from Spain the 
immediate release of Baron d'Asfeld, im- 
prisoned at Milan ; and the censure of 
Melgar, the governor. At all points, and 
in a space of time the briefest, Louis re- 
covered the prestige which for a moment 
he had sacrificed ; and his personal pride, 
at once delicate and vengeful, was best 
solaced by the certainty that he had swept, 
as he thought, into eternal oblivion the 
agent and chief witness of his short dis- 
credit. Mattioli was given out as dead : 
a story was circulated that he had met 



248 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

with a fatal accident on a journey. The 
Duke of Mantua might have doubted this, 
and probably did doubt it ; but he had 
sufficient reason for wishing out of his path 
the agent who, for objects of his own, had 
striven his best to ruin him with Louis 
XIV. 

And the family of Mattioli — why were 
they silent ? Upon this point, history has 
bequeathed us the curious legacy of an un- 
finished tragedy — curious to us, who can 
follow the tragedy to its end. Did his 
family also believe him dead, or were they 
cowed and voiceless under the stroke of 
Louis's wrath ? It is not known. What 
alone is certain is, that he was never found 
by them again. The letter dictated to 
Mattioli, and signed under compulsion, was 
the last that his father received from him. 
His wife died in the convent of the Filles 
de Saint- Louis at Bologna, while he . was 



"THE MOST GENEROUS" KING. 249 

still a hopeless prisoner : there is no record 
to show that his fate was known to her. 
The space within the genealogical tree of 
the family, which the date of Mattioli's 
death should fill, is blank.* Louis's ven- 
geance smote deep : in annihilating the man, 
it had crushed the family ; and perhaps 
nothing is sadder in the memories of this 
mystery of two hundred years, apart from 
the fate of the Mask himself, than the 
wretched ignorance in which his abduction 
and living burial left his nearest kin. 

* Topin : citing the Arbor prisac nobilisque masculine? families de 
Mattiolis. 



250 



The