CHAPTER V. 

Good night, good night ! 

Romeo and Juliet. 

May be seen to-day, on the flanks 
Dungeon of of Alpine heights, near the source 

Pigneroi Q f t ke streams which go to form 
the rich basin of the Po, the ruins of 
the dungeon wherein Mattioli began the 
long night of his captivity. Close by stands 
the Cathedral church of Saint-Maurice, " dou 
la vue embrasse," says Topin, " le plus 
riant horizon." 

As different as might be was the face dis- 
closed by Pigneroi on the day that Catinat 
carried in his prisoner through the Safety 
Gate — the small secure postern which led 
straight into the recesses of the dungeon. A 
citadel, a dungeon : around the citadel a town, 



THE DUNGEON OF PIGNEROL. 251 

itself enclosed within vast fortifications, at the 
entrance of the valley of the Perouse, on the 
river Chisone, seven leagues south-west of 
Turin, twenty-eight from Nice, and thirty 
east of Grenoble — such was Pignerol, the 
Piedmontese town of the 17th century.* 

The little town, which, as early as the 12th 
century, the princes of Savoy had fortified 
for the surety of their possessions, climbed 
upwards in the form of an amphitheatre ; 
with russet roofs and slender campaniles and 
clusters of turret-fashioned chimneys. A 
moat isolated the citadel from the town ; and 
from the citadel the eye followed a double 
line of solid walls, forming a huge paral- 
lelogram, with four high towers for supports : 
in the midst of all, the great square keep or 
dungeon, black of aspect, " aux fenetres 
bardees de fer." The fortifications were 
composed of a series of bastions, half-moons, 

* lung. 



252 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

and counter-guards. The two main gates of 
the town were named of France and of 
Turin ; the secret or Safety Gate was 
opened at rare times to admit by stealth 
some prisoner whose guards had been 
ordered not to take him through the town. 

This little mountain bourg of Pignerol,* 
peopled by French troops and Italian sub- 
jects, was not inconsiderable in the 17th 
century. The officers in chief were the 
governor general, the commandant of the 
town, the King's lieutenant governing the 
citadel, the commandant of the dungeon, the 
members of the council of war, and of the 
" conseil souverain " ; a fair posse for a 
world so tiny. There was the perpetual 
va-et-vient of a frontier place : officers from 
Paris or Turin, rejoining their regiments in 
the army of Italy, passed through ; there was 
much traffic and some commerce. 

* Ital.. Pinerolo. 



THE DUNGEON OF PIGNEROL. 253 

At the time of the coming of Mattioli to 
Pignerol, the dungeon of that place had 
been for fourteen years the charge of 
.Benigne d'Auvergne de Saint-Mars, seigneur 
of Dimon and of Palteau, bailli and governor 
of Sens. Born in 1626, in the environs of 
Montfort l'Amaury, Saint-Mars died in the 
Bastille, its governor, September 26th, 1708, 
in his eighty-second year. At the age of 
twelve he had entered, as " enfant de 
troupe," the First Company of the King's 
Musketeers. In 1650 he was a full musketeer 
of that Company ; in 1660, brigadier ; and 
" marechal des logis," or quarter-master, in 
1664. The year following, 1665, saw him in 
command of the dungeon of Pignerol, in 
which command he continued until he went 
to the fortress of Exiles in 1681. Louis XIV. 
granted him a patent of nobility in 1673. 
At the date we are arrived at (1679), Saint- 
Mars was in his fifty-fourth year ; of sinister 



254 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

renown in Pignerol : the gaoler quintessen- 
tialised. 

lung calls him " un vrai bouledogue," 
but that term is applicable chiefly in the 
moral sense. Observe him outwardly, as he 
creeps, almost a-tiptoe, through the mazes of 
his prison : a small shrivelled person, 
shadowy of figure, wizen and dark of face, 
little head bobbing nervously betwixt the 
narrow shoulders, arms and hands twitching. 
" A mortal ugly little man, looking eighty 
at the least ; all bent and tottering ; inces- 
santly in a passion ; swearing and blas- 
pheming horribly ; inexorably cruel." This 
is the unsympathetic portrait left of him by 
Constantin de Renneville, a prisoner of the 
Bastille when Saint-Mars was about seventy- 
four. " Inexorablv cruel " seems not alto- 
gether just ; indeed, I find few traces of 
active cruelty in Saint- Mars's career as 
gaoler ; but a man so inflexible and so callous 






V 



THE DUNGEON OF PIGNEROL. 255 

in doing the bidding of King or minister could 
be nothing but the ogre of his prison. 

It is proper to spare him the charge of 
unnecessary cruelty, for his memory is void of 
sympathy : on the one side, an unimaginative 
pedant who has no rule for his prison but 
the strictest letter of his orders from Ver- 
sailles ; on the other, a mean and greedy 
type of the soldier of fortune, always 
whining for money and always bemoaning 
his lot. He had peculiar relations with the 
minister Louvois. His wife's sister was 
Louvois's mistress, and he can ask nothing 
of Louvois which Louvois does not grant. 
The ideal gaoler, harassed incessantly by 
fears for the safety of his prisoners, he 
packs his coffers with the moneys sent him 
for their keep. Holding them as wards of 
the King, whom he served like a slave, 
watching them so closely that he was himself 
a prisoner in his own prisons for over forty 



256 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

years, these charges of his were still, in his 
private view, his " sitting hens"* ("aux 
ceufs d'or ") ; and they were a fortune to 
him. He left silver plate, furniture, jewels, 
six hundred thousand francs of ready money, 
and seign,eurial property worth ten million 
francs. Among the governors of the prison- 
fortresses of France, most of whom enriched 
themselves at the cost of their prisoners and 
of the State, the position and the possessions 
of Saint-Mars were unique. As commandant 
of the dungeon of Pignerol he held his 
authority directly from the minister, owing 
no responsibility either to the governor 
general or to the King's lieutenant ; as 
Louvois's relative (upon the left) he held the 
minister in fee ; and what he asked of him 
was granted in advance. 

But, as the prince of gaolers, Saint-Mars 
was worth humouring. His discretion was 

* lung. 



THE DUNGEON OF PIGNEROL. 257 

proof against all temptation ; and such was 
his habit of distrust, in what concerned his 
prisoners, that the distrustful Louvois him- 
self found it possible at times to chide his 
over-caution. Uneasy, timorous, and taciturn, 
the duties of his office gave him never a 
moment's rest. The King's orders were 
fulfilled with a servile exactitude : to discuss 
them, says Topin, would have seemed a 
crime, to seek to interpret them was super- 
fluous. No prison wall was high enough or 
stout enough, no moat was deep enough 
or wide enough, no bars or bolts were 
strong enough, no sentinel was watchful 
enough, no spy alert enough to keep that 
anxious soul at rest. He carries every 
detail of his cares to Louvois ; matters the 
most puerile are constantly rehearsed in his 
despatches. Does a stranger come to the 
town on business or a visit of pleasure ; if 
his sojourn is prolonged, Saint-Mars is 

17 



258 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

certain that a plot is hatching to carry off 
some prisoner from the dungeon. Nay, if 
the stranger shows some little curiosity con- 
cerning the citadel, Saint-Mars arrests him out 
of hand, and holds him captive during a pro- 
longed examination. " Lists of the travellers 
coming to Pignerol were drawn up for him 
every month, that he might see what names 
occurred too frequently. The prisoners' linen 
before being sent out of the dungeon, was 
soaked in water, then dried before a fire in 
the presence of officers who had to make 
sure that nothing had been written upon it. 
The smallest change in the habits of his 
prisoners drove Saint-Mars into a fever of 
anxiety. In everything they did, and in 
everything they abstained from doing, he 
saw the signal of some criminal attempt ; and 
one day, after his usual visit to Fouquet and 
Lauzun, and his rigorous examination of their 
rooms, discovering nothing out of the 




-co 



THE DUNGEON OF PIGNEROL. 261 

common, he was first surprised, and then 
exceedingly alarmed. The absence of any- 
apparent signal was in itself a signal for 
him. . . . After reading his naive and 
sincere correspondence, one is tempted to 
pity him almost as much as the prisoners 
in his keeping ; since, enjoying a scarcely 
greater liberty than they did, the perpetual 
fears that he suffered on their account 
rendered him in some sort their victim." * 

Such was the man into whose hands Catinat 
gave Count Mattioli on the 2nd of May, 1679. 
" He is in the chamber which Dubreuil 
occupied, where he will be treated civilly, 
according to the request of the Abbe 
d'Estrades, until the King's wishes with re- 
gard to him are known." Already, however, 
the prisoner had lost his identity, for he was 
passed into Pignerol, and received there, 
under the name of Lestang : as Lestang, and 

* Topin. 



262 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK 

by no other name, was he known in the 
fortress, — save only to Saint-Mars. " The 
King's wishes with regard to him" were very 
soon made known. In less than a fortnight 
from the day of Mattioli's arrest — the 15th 
of May — Louvois wrote Saint-Mars concern- 
ing him " . . . . that it is not the 
intention of the King that the Sieur de 
Lestang should be well treated, or that, 
except the absolute necessaries of life, you 
should give him anything to soften his cap- 
tivity." Thus "the most generous King" — 
whose commands are renewed on the 20th 
of the month. "Your letter of the 10th of 
this month " — it is Louvois again to Saint- 
Mars — "has been delivered to me. I have 
nothing to add to what I have already 
commanded you respecting the severity 
with which the person named Lestang must 
be treated." Two days later, May 22nd : 
" You must keep Lestang in the rigorous 



THE DUNGEON OF PIGNEROL. 263 

confinement I enjoined in my former letters, 
without allowing him to see a doctor, unless 
you know he is in absolute want of one.'' 
Later, July 25th, Saint-Mars receives in- 
structions that his prisoner may have writing 
materials ; scarcely, however, for his own 
solace. " You may give paper and ink to 
the Sieur de Lestang, with permission to 
put in writing whatever he wishes to say. 
You will then send it to me, and I will let 
you know whether it deserves any considera- 
tion." 

From the picture that history has left us 
of Saint-Mars, it is easily inferred that he 
would read aright the instruction to treat a 
prisoner "with severity": but the proof 
itself is not wanting. We have seen that 
Mattioli was arrested in the beginning of 
May, 1679. In eight months from that 
time the rigours of his imprisonment had re- 
sulted in the temporary loss of his reason 



264 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

He was neither the first nor the last of the 
State prisoners of pre-Revolutionary France 
whom the dungeon reduced to madness. 
Consider that these places were virtually 
impenetrable ; that there were no inspectors 
of prisons, no visiting justices ; and that the 
governor in his dungeon wielded a power 
scarcely less tremendous than the King at 
Versailles. There was no system of ad- 
ministration under which the prisoner could 
stand upon his rights, with privilege of 
appeal beyond the prison walls ; he had no 
rights — save what were granted him as 
peculiar favours. He depended in all things 
upon the governor : a miserly governor 
might starve and keep him cold and meanly 
clad ; a cruel one had darker means at his dis- 
posal, and used them — the torture, the whip, 
the subterranean cachot were always there. 
In eight months Mattioli had grown mad. 
On the 6th of January, 1680, Saint-Mars 



THE DUNGEON OF PIGNEROL. 265 

wrote to Louvois : — " I am obliged, Sir, to 
inform you, that the Sieur de Lestang is 
become like the monk I have the care of; 
that is to say, subject to fits of raving mad- 
ness ; from which the Sieur Dubreuil also is 
not exempt." The methods of Saint-Mars 
were rather fatal to sanity ; here were three 
lunatics together at one time in Pignerol. 
In the third week of February: "The Sieur 
de Lestang, who has been nearly a year in 
my custody, complains that he is not treated 
as a man of his quality, and the minister of 

a great prince, ought to be I 

think he is deranged, by the way he talks 
to me ; telling me he converses every day 
with God and the angels ; that they have 
told him of the death of the Duke of 
Mantua and of the Duke of Lorraine ; 
and, as an additional proof of his madness, 
he says he has the honour of being nearly 
related to the King, to whom he wishes to 



266 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

write in complaint of the way I treat him. 
I have not thought proper to give him 
paper and ink for that purpose, perceiving 
him not to be in his right senses." 

Versailles was quite unmoved by these 
recitals. Louvois, with the King behind 
him, was still hardening his heart. Even 
the consolations of religion were to be ad- 
ministered within the very narrowest limits 
imposed by the Church. " It will be suffi- 
cient to let the prisoners of the lower 
tower " — in which Mattioli was confined — 
" confess once a year." In the same de- 
spatch, the ioth of July: — "With regard to 
the Sieur de Lestang, I wonder at your 
patience, and that you should wait for an 
order to treat such a rascal as he deserves, 
when he is wanting in respect to you." 

Then the mad Mattioli was put with the 
mad Jacobin ; an economy on the part of 
Saint-Mars, "to avoid the necessity of having 



THE DUNGEON OF PIGNEROL. 267 

two priests." Mattioli, imagining the monk 
a spy upon him, " walked about with long 
strides, his cloak over his nose, crying out 
that he was not a dupe." The Jacobin, 
11 who was always seated on his truckle-bed, 
with his elbows on his knees, looked at him 
gravely, without listening to him " ; but one 
day, "getting down from his bed, stark 
naked," he set on preaching, " without rhyme 
or reason " ; and preached till he could 
preach no longer. With a naivety of con- 
fession most characteristic, Saint- Mars adds : 
" I and my lieutenants saw all their 
manoeuvres through a hole above the door." 
This is a sore history, not to be too 
long pursued. Nearly all that is known 
of Mattioli's life in Pignerol is concen- 
trated into this' glimpse of the poor frenzied 
pair, mewed together in their narrow 
Bedlam, with " I and my lieutenants " watch- 
ing them behind the door. Yet it was 



268 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

better to be mad than sane — in Pignerol — 
with Saint-Mars. 

Fifteen years Mattioli lay here ; lived fif- 
teen years on the vapours of Pignerol. A 
solitary instance is recorded, pathetic enough 
in the circumstances, of his attempt to win 
over one of the lieutenants of Saint-Mars, 
Blainvilliers by name, by the offer of a ring. 
In some raving hour the prisoner had 
written "abusive sentences with charcoal on 
the wall," and Blainvilliers had threatened 
him with beating. A day or two later, as 
the officer was serving him with dinner, 
Mattioli said : " Sir, here is a little ring, 
which I wish to give you, and I beg you to 
accept of it." Saint-Mars, in his inevitable 
report to Louvois, conjectures it "well worth 
fifty or sixty pistoles " : it was probably the 
ring which Mattioli had received from 
Louis XIV. 

Concerning Pignerol, the rest is silence. 



THE DUNGEON OF PIGNEROL. 269 

Mountain and wood and stream hem round 
that altitude of grey-black stone, where 
Louis's prisoner sits through fifteen spectral 
years. 



270 



CHAPTER VI. 

It has been rightly said that the 
interest of Count Mattioli's captivity 

Inquisition * ¦* 

01 juies owes everything to the supposition 

Loiseleur. . . • t • ' 1 1 

that we have in him the actual 
Man in the Mask. So closely did the 
jealous anger of the King conceal him, 
that his life in prison, mysterious even to 
the creatures of Saint-Mars, has left scarcely 
a trace in the real history of Pignerol, 
of the Isles, or of the Bastille. Legend, 
indeed, abounds ; but facts are of the 
scantiest. Was this in truth the Man in 
the Iron Mask ? 

Who first sought to identify him ? Let 
us summarise briefly on this head the ex- 
haustive perquisitions of Topin. To begin 



INQUISITION OF JUIES IOISEIEUR. 271 

with, there is the political pamphlet already 
cited, La Prudenza trionfante di Casale, 
published in Cologne in 1682. Here is set 
forth in detail the whole negotiation, with 
the parts played by the Abbe d'Estrades 
and Mattioli, Giuliani and Pinchesne, Catinat 
and d'Asfeld, and the Duke of Mantua. 
Five years later, in 1687, a compilation issued 
at Leyde under the title Histoire abregee de 
I'Ettrope gave the translation in French of 
an Italian letter denouncing the abduction 
of Mattioli. There is then a long interval. 
In 1749, Muratori, in his Annali a" Italia, 
related the history of the intrigue for Casale, 
and the capture of the Duke of Mantua's 
plenipotentiary. In 1770 appeared the letter 
of Baron d'Heiss in the Journal Encyclo- 
pedique, in which he says : "It appears that 
this Secretary to the Duke of Mantua might 
very well be the Man in the Iron Mask, 
transferred from Pignerol to the Isles of 



272 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

Sainte-Marguerite, and thence to the Bastille 
in 1690,* when M. de Saint-Mars became 
governor of that place." In 1786, the Italian 
Fantuzzi, in his Notizie degli scrittori 
Bolognesi, summed up what had hitherto 
been written on the subject. The same 
opinion, that Mattioli was the Man in the 
Mask, was sustained in the year of the 
Revolution by the i( Chevalier de B.", in a 
volume entitled Londres. — Correspondance 
interceptee. In November, 1795, M. de 
Chambrier, who had been Prussian minister 
at the Court of Turin, essayed to prove in 
a lecture delivered to the Belles-Lettres 
class at the Academy of Berlin, that Count 
Mattioli and the Man in the Iron Mask 
were one and the same individual, f Just 
one hundred years ago appeared the pamphlet 

* It was in 1698 that Mattioli came to the Bastille. 

t Mentioning the subject one day to a very intelligent German lady 
of my acquaintance, she replied : "Mattioli? Yes, of course. We 
were taught that at school." 



INQUISITION OF JULES LOISELEUR. 273 

of Roux-Fazillac, who was the first to publish 
documents in support of his case. Much 
more complete, however, were the documents 
of Delort, whose small, well-reasoned treatise, 
Histoire de P Homme au Masque de Fer y was 
published in Paris in 1825. By permission 
of Comte d'Hauterive, Keeper of the Archives 
of the Office of Secretary of State for the 
Foreign Department, Delort examined and 
made excellent use of all the despatches 
known at that day. The history that he 
drew from them seemed conclusive. It is, 
in effect, the true history ; but, as will be 
seen, it is the true history with a very 
important error. Ellis's work, which appeared 
a year or two later (the second edition, whith 
is before me, is dated 1827) was little more 
than an adaptation of Delort's. Camille 
Rousset, in his Histoire de Louvois, rehearses 
once more the story of the negotiations, and 

says : " We share the opinion of those who 

18 



274 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

hold that the Masque de Fer was none other 
than Mattioli." Depping, in his Correspondance 
administrative sous Louis XIV., is of the 
same mind. 

Except, however by Roux-Fazillac and 
Delort, there was little attempt to prove that 
the person arrested and carried to Pignerol 
on the 2nd of May, 1679, was identical with 
the prisoner who died in the Bastille on the 
19th of November, 1703. And that, of course, 
constitutes the knot of the problem. " That 
Mattioli was seized in 1679 by a French 
agent, and forcibly carried to Pignerol — 
this, as we have seen, was a fact which had 
long been known. But that intrigue is no 
longer our sole concern : a mere preliminary 
of the question which engages us. What 
is essential is, to follow the minister of the 
Duke of Mantua from prison to prison, and 
to see not only whether he might have been, 
but whether it is impossible that he should 



INQUISITION OF JULES LOISELEUR. 275 

not have been, that mysterious prisoner 
brought by Saint-Mars in 1698 from the 
Isles of Sainte-Marguerite to the Bastille, 
where he died in 1703. Delort believed 
that he had proved it. His conviction was 
profound, and to many his demonstration 
seemed irrefutable."* But the documents 
discovered by Delort did not contain the 
whole history ; the omissions, in fact, were 
serious, and we are now to see how a keen 
examiner, detecting them, with one stroke 
of his pen shattered the system — and left 
the riddle of the Mask apparently insoluble 
to the end of time. 

Mattioli was incarcerated in Pignerol on 
the 2nd of May, 1679. At this date the 
dungeon held, besides Fouquet and Lauzun, 
four other prisoners concerning whom it is 
necessary to note that they were quite obscure 
and unimportant persons. One of them, 

* Topin. 

18* 



276 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

Eustache Dauger, brought to Pignerol in 
July, 1669, had served Fouquet in the capacity 
of valet. Another, the Jacobin monk whom 
we have seen sharing his cell with Mattioli, 
and who had been imprisoned in April, 1674, 
is branded by Louvois as " a finished rogue, 
whom you cannot treat badly enough." He 
was to have " no fire in his chamber, unless 
he is ill or the severity of the cold compels 
it, and no other nourishment than bread 
with wine-and- water." The two remaining 
prisoners were a certain La Riviere and the 
Dubreuil whose name has been mentioned. 
So insignificant were these, that when Saint- 
Mars was called from the government of 
Pignerol to that of Exiles, Louvois asked 
ot him a memoir furnishing their names and 
the reasons why they had been imprisoned. 
It is clearly not among prisoners of such small 
consideration, prisoners of whom the Minister 
knows neither the names nor the causes of 



INQUISITION OF JULES L01SELEUR. 277 

their detention, that we shall find the Man 
in the Mask. Fouquet died at Pignerol in 
March, 1680. Lauzun was released the 22nd 
of April, 1 68 1. 

On the 1 2th of May, 1681, Louvois 
announced to Saint-Mars that the King had 
appointed him to the command of the fortress 
of Exiles. On the 9th of June the Minister 
wrote again, instructing Saint-Mars as to the 
precautions to be observed respecting the 
journey from Pignerol of those of his prisoners 
who were to be removed. 

" His Majesty's desire is, that as soon as 
the room at Exiles, which you shall judge 
the most proper for the safe keeping of the 
two prisoners in the lower tower, shall be 
ready to receive them, you send these prisoners 
out of the citadel of Pignerol in a litter, and 
conduct them there under the escort of your 
troop . . . Immediately after the pri- 
soners' departure, it is his Majesty's wish 



278 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

that you proceed to Exiles, to take posses- 
sion of the government, and to settle yourself 
there." 

Here were two prisoners to be removed. 
A word follows concerning " the rest of the 
prisoners now in your charge," which it will 
be important to remember at the final stage 
of the enquiry. " The Sieur de Chamoy," 
says Louvois, " has instructions to pay two 
crowns a day for the maintenance of these 
three prisoners." There were thus five 
prisoners in Pignerol on the eve of the 
departure of Saint- Mars for Exiles. 

The prisoners to be removed were the two 
prisoners of the lower tower. The lower 
tower was, as we have seen, the prison of 
Mattioli and the Jacobin monk : what more 
natural, then, than to conclude that these 
were the two whom Saint-Mars carried with 
him to Exiles ? This was the obvious view 
adopted by Roux-Fazillac, Delort, and all 



INQUISITION OF JULES LOISELEUR. 281 

investigators up to the time of Topin. Was 
it the true one ? 

In the course of years the climate of Exiles 
affected the health of Saint-Mars ; and the 
ever-obliging Louvois procured him a change 
of government. Early in 1687 he was called 
to the Isles of Sainte- Marguerite- Saint- 
Honorat, in the Sea of Provence. To the 
fortress of Sainte-Marguerite he took one 
prisoner only. The date was the 30th of 
April, 1687. Delort and the rest, determined 
not to lose sight of their candidate for a 
moment, declared that this " seul prisonnier " 
must be Mattioli. No name was mentioned, 
and definite proof was lacking ; but probability 
favoured the conjecture. 

Let us see how it is established that one 
alone of the two prisoners brought from 
Pignerol to Exiles was carried from Exiles 
to the Isles. A few days before the close 
of 1685 (December the 23rd), Saint-Mars 



282 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

wrote to Louvois : " My prisoners are still 
ill, and under medical treatment. They are, 
however, perfectly tranquil." In the autumn 
of the following year, one of the prisoners 
was dropsical. "You ought to have told 
me," writes Louvois, October 9th, 1686, 
"which of your prisoners has become 
dropsical." He writes again on the 3rd of 
November : " It will be proper to let your 
dropsical prisoner be confessed, when you 
are certain that his end is near." In the 
first days of January, 1687, the prisoner 
died. " I have received your letter of the 5th 
inst.," writes Louvois (January 13th, 1687), 
"which informs me of the death of one of 
your prisoners. I will say no more concern- 
ing your desire for a change of govern- 
ment, since you have already learned that 
the King has been pleased to confer on you 
a better post than the one you are in posses- 
sion of." The death of one of the prisoners 



INQUISITION OF JULES LOISELEUR. 283 

brought by Saint-Mars from Pignerol to 
Exiles is thus demonstrated. Was it Mattioli 
or the other ? Delort and his contemporaries 
concluded, positively for the most part, that 
it was the other. 

They overlooked, however, one fact of the 
extremest significance. It was, that from the 
date of this death at Exiles Mattioli s name 
disappears entirely from the correspondence of 
Louvois and Saint- Mars. Now there may 
be nothing absolutely conclusive in this ; but, 
taken with the testimony of the death, it 
seems to plunge into hopeless uncertainty 
every system which has sought to solve 
through Mattioli the mystery of the Man in 
the Mask. Such was the terribly destructive 
criticism of Jules Loiseleur, in the Revue 
Contemporaine* a criticism which demolishes 
those systems in a fashion the most decisive. 
If Mattioli and the monk were the two 

* July 2 1 st, 1867. 



284 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

prisoners whom Saint-Mars carried to Exiles 
(and we have seen that their removal was 
ordered by Louvois) ; if one of the pair died 
of dropsy at Exiles in January, 1687 (and 
the document in proof has been cited) ; and 
if from this date Mattioli's name vanishes 
from the letters of Louvois and Saint-Mars 
— with what confidence may it be pretended 
that Mattioli was the masked man borne in 
secret by Saint-Mars to the Bastille in 
September, 1698 ? " His demonstration,'' 
wrote a contemporary critic of Loiseleur, " at 
once luminous and peremptory, has ex- 
hausted the question ; and, in default of fresh 
documents, no serious mind will ever return 
to it." Topin confesses that after reading 
and re-reading this demonstration,* he could 
resolve no otherwise than that the secret of 
the Mask was and would remain impenetrable. 

* Refuted, nevertheless, by him in so far as concerned Loiseleur's 
hypothesis of the arrest of the spy by Catinat. 



*85 



CHAPTER VII. 

Comes the question then : has 

The Missing . _ - . . 

the Man in the Mask once more 

Link 

Revealed by and finally eluded us ? Let us go 
a step further. Baudry had said 
of the inquisition of Loiseleur, that it had 
exhausted the problem ; that, if other docu- 
ments were not forthcoming, no serious 
mind would return to its consideration. 
But it has been stated before, and the 
statement must be repeated, that the whole 
truth of this strange drama was not con- 
tained in any single set of documents. 
Louis XIV. was little likely to leave us the 
epitome of it ; and no minister who had 
part in the affair ever forgot the King's 



286 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

command to d'Estrades : // faudra que 
personne ne sfacke ce que cet homme sera 
devenu, — No one must know what becomes 
of this man. His very name had already 
disappeared, save only for those few who 
had known it from the first. At Pignerol, 
he was Lestang ; in the Bastille, he was 
the prisoner from Provence. Apart from 
the brief but pregnant documents of the 
Bastille, to be presented when their time 
comes, his identity was only to be made 
good by the comparison of innumerable 
despatches, " not one among which furnishes 
by itself an irrefutable proof, but which in 
their entirety, with the logical deductions 
that may be drawn from them, conduct to 
an absolute certainty." * 

But there could be no doubt that, after 
Loiseleur, fresh documents were necessary, 
if this certainty were ever to be attained. 

* Topin. 




A Corner of the Fort of Exiles. 



THE MISSING LINK REVEALED. 289 

These documents were found by Topin. 
The passage in which he explains how 
he first imagined their existence, and then 
went on to prove it, is peculiarly interest- 
ing, as showing both his extreme mental 
ingenuity and the inexhaustible patience 
with which he pursued a task now regarded 
as well - nigh impossible of completion. 
There comes first a letter, of which, at 
sight, the significance is less than nothing : 
a letter from Louvois to Saint- Mars, dated 
January 5th, 1682. At this time Saint- 
Mars has been but a few months at 
Exiles ; but he is already clamouring for a 
change of government, and has evidently 
been sounding Louvois on the subject. 
Louvois replies : 

" I received your letter of the 28th ult. 
You do not know where your interest lies, 
when you propose to exchange the govern- 
ment of Exiles against that of Casale, the 

'9 



290 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

value of which is only two thousand livres 
a year.* I strongly advise you not to think 
further of it." 

There is no more in the despatch than 
that. It suggests nothing but the interest 
of Louvois in the personal fortunes of 
Saint-Mars, whose sister-in law was the 
minister's mistress. Saint-Mars, incessantly 
grasping (and suffering in health at Exiles), 
seeks another change of place : Louvois 
responds that the change he proposes will 
put nothing into his purse. It is the letter, 
not of the minister to the gaoler, but of the 
minister to his friend : it is a strictly per- 
sonal communication. What, then, is its 
value as a counterpoise to the criticism of 
Loiseleur, which showed — upon the docu- 
ments put in — that Mattioli, if he did 
not die of dropsy at Exiles, did at all 
events disappear incontinently from the des- 

* The amount which Saint- Mars was receiving at Exiles. 



THE MISSING LINK REVEALED. 291 

patches which, up to this point, had been 

almost solely occupied with him ? 

The supposition is still, of course, that 

Mattioli was one of the two prisoners whom 

Saint-Mars carried with him from Pignerol 

to Exiles. Just here, however, the doubt 

comes in that suggested itself to Topin. If 

Mattioli were with Saint-Mars at Exiles, 

what more imprudent than that he should 

propose to take him — an Italian subject 

forcibly stolen from Italy — into an Italian 

town, and a town Mantuan in its hereditary 

interests ! If it were in any way possible 

that Mattioli should discover himself to 

friends, he would at least have a better 

chance of doing so in Casale than at Exiles. 

How did this not occur to Saint-Mars ? 

And, if it missed the sleepless intelligence 

of Saint-Mars, how came it also to be passed 

by Louvois ? But Louvois evidently has not 

a thought of danger. His sole motive in 

19* 



292 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

dissuading Saint-Mars from Casale is that 
his pocket would profit nothing by the ex- 
change. Mattioli, whom it would have been 
unwise to carry back into Italy, is not so 
much as mentioned. Then Mattioli, perhaps, 
was not at Exiles at all, and had never 
been sent there ? This was the inspiration 
that Topin drew from the colourless despatch 
of Louvois. 

The chance of success in this direction 
was a very feeble one ; for the despatch of 
Louvois was extant, ordering the removal of 
the two prisoners of the tour d' en das, the 
lower tower, to which Mattioli and the monk 
had been relegated ; and the despatch had 
closed with the injunction that " the effects 
belonging to the Sieur de Mattioli which 
are in your possession are to be taken to 
Exiles, so that they may be given back to 
him, should his Majesty ever decide to set 
the prisoner at liberty." This was categorical. 



THE MISSING LINK REVEALED. 293 

Still, Topin's doubts persisted. If Mattioli 
were indeed at Exiles, how could Saint-Mars 
propose to transfer him to Casale ? And 
how did Louvois let that proposal pass un- 
rebuked ? With these questions pricking him, 
Topin returned to the Bibliotheque Imperiale 
to begin the search anew — and the missing 
link revealed itself. 

It was found in a letter from Saint-Mars 
to d'Estrades, bearing date June 25th, 1681. 
Saint- Mars, the least gregarious of men, had 
sworn an ardent friendship with the Abbe, 
and he hastens to share with him the news 
of his appointment to Exiles. " Count on 
me as your most devoted. I received yesterday 
the warrant appointing me to the governor- 
ship of Exiles, at a salary of two thousand 
livres. . . . I am to take with me two 

jail-birds * whom I have here 

Mattioli remains where he is, with two other 

* " Deux merles." 



294 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

prisoners. One of my lieutenants, named 
Villebois, will have charge of them." 

Mattioli, therefore, was not the prisoner 
who died at Exiles in January, 1687. He 
never went to Exiles at all. The purpose 
indicated in Louvois's despatch, of the 9th 
of June, 1 68 1, had been abandoned; and 
Mattioli remained at Pignerol, where he will 
be found in the keeping of Villebois. The 
long silence of Louvois and Saint-Mars 
concerning him thus receives its natural 
explanation. 

The perplexity, the scepticism which Loise- 
leur's examination had produced, vanished 
upon this discovery. Mattioli was at Pignerol 
and at the Isles and in the Bastille ; Delort's 
error, which for a time cast into uncertainty 
the whole history of the Mask, lay in re- 
moving him from Pignerol to Exiles. There 
are two traits or characters in the history 
of the Mask which attach themselves to 



THE MISSING LINK REVEALED. 295 

Mattioli alone, of all the prisoners whom 
Saint-Mars had in his keeping : the unvarying 
tradition of his detention at Sainte-Marguerite, 
and the documental certainty of his detention 
at Pignerol. In Du Junca's journal, the 
prisoner whom Saint-Mars brings to the 
Bastille in September, 1698, is an ancient 
prisoner whom he had at Pignerol. Exiles 
finds no place in the entry. We know that 
Saint-Mars had Mattioli in his charge during 
two years at Pignerol, and Topin has shown 
that the prisoner was not transferred to 
Exiles. But for that unfortunate error, which 
is principally identified with Delort, the pro- 
blem might long since have been resolved. 



296 



CHAPTER VI I. 

Most visitors to the Riviera have 

The 

prisoner of ma de the little trip to the Isles 
consequence. of Sainte - Marguerite and Saint- 
Honorat, enticed by the piquant legend of 
the Man in the Iron Mask. A good woman 
discovers you his cell, charms you and thrills 
you with stories of his fine apparel, his 
plate, and the deference shown him by Saint- 
Mars : poor Mask, who had no fine clothes 
and no plate, and whom the deferential 
gaoler had threatened with a cudgel ! The 
Isles owe most of their celebrity to what is 
purely fabulous in this history, but they have 
other annals also. 

Lying some fifteen hundred yards from the 
shore, the two islands, of which Sainte- 



PRISONER OF CONSEQUENCE. 297 

Marguerite is the larger, are as sentinels over 
the pleasure-haunts of Nice, Cannes, and San 
Remo. Rock and reef lend some amount of 
danger to the approach. Within, the Isles 
are dark with pine trees, cumbered and 
strengthened with shaggy hills, gigantic 
boulders. Climbing Sainte-Marguerite's top, 
the traveller's eyes are filled with a marvellous 
golden light ; before him undulates on either 
hand all that sun-bathed shore of the Riviera ; 
he counts the glistening villas of Cannes ; 
grey-green hills of olive rise beyond ; to the 
left streams out the long chain of the Esterel, 
" with contours brusque and varied " ; and on 



the right the Maritime Alps cast up their 
"thousand years of snow." 

The Romans were here once ; hermits have 
dwelt in these island solitudes; the Saracens 
have invaded and the Spaniards have sacked 
them. * In the dawn of the fifth century 

* Topin. 



298 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

Saint- Honorat founded here a monastery, 
greatly celebrated of the Gauls, where "thou- 
sands of apostles " practised virtue and the 
monkish arts. On the smaller island is 
still shown the well which the saint created, 
yielding a miraculous sweet water. Here 
came Francis I., prisoner of the Spaniards 
after the disastrous field of Pavia, to endure a 
harsh captivity. Here,, to Sainte- Marguerite, 
was sent, in December, 1873, . Marshal 
Bazaine, who broke prison and escaped the 
night of the 9th of August, 1874. The two 
islands bear the common name of the lies de 
Lerins. The memory of the Iron Mask, 
whose prison was the fortress of Sainte- 
Marguerite, has conferred on the Lerins a 
celebrity which seems likely to endure. 

Hither, then, came, in 1687, the most incor- 
ruptible gaoler, Saint-Mars. He had received 
word of his new appointment on the 20th of 
January ; he was in ill-health, and eager for 



PRISONER OF CONSEQUENCE. 299 

the healing South. He wrote to Louvois : — 
" I am most grateful for the new favour which 
his Majesty has just bestowed on me (the 
Government of the Isles of Sainte-Mar- 
guerite). If you order me to proceed there 
without delay, I would request to be allowed 
to take the road through Piedmont, on account 
of the great quantity of snow that lies between 
this place and Embrun." He went to Sainte- 
Marguerite in February, and was twenty-six 
days in bed, " with a continual fever." 

Mattioli, this while, supposed at Exiles, lay 
close in Pignerol. We have glimpses of the 
guard that was kept upon him. Villebois, 
chained to his prisoner, seems never to have 
been allowed to leave the dungeon. In such 
a nervous fit as Saint-Mars was almost inces- 
santly a prey to, he wrote to Louvois, asking 
to whom he should entrust the prisoner, 
supposing he were incapacitated by sickness ; 
and Louvois replied : " To the person you can 



300 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

most rely on." Even the priest of the prison 
was distrusted — " Your prisoners are to be 
confessed only once a year." Books of 
devotion might be given to them ; but " you 
are to take care they do not use them for 
passing notes to one another." One night 
someone is . suspected of haunting a bastion 
gate of Pignerol, and Villebois is instructed to 
" do your utmost to discover who the person 
was." There is a rare effort of Mattioli — the 
only one that records prove — to disclose his 
situation : he writes something on a lining 
torn from his pocket. It is discovered, and 
communicated to Versailles, and the answer is 
returned- — "You must burn any scraps on 
which Mattioli has written." The walls of 
Pignerol, and the road beneath, were strictly 
watched ; the sentinels had orders to let no 
one linger about the gates. 

Saint-Mars, on his part, while at Exiles, 
had enjoyed a measure of liberty that he 




-3 

¦ 
Si 

6 



PRISONER OF CONSEQUENCE. 303 

had never known when guarding Mattioli 
at Pignerol. He went on little visits to 
d'Estrades, to Catinat ; he paid his court 
to the Duke of Savoy ; he was allowed 
from time to time to sleep out of the gaol. 
" Madame de Saint- Mars having told me," 
writes Louvois, in March, 1685, "that you 
wish to go to the baths of Aix-en-Savoie, 
I spoke about it to the King, and his 
Majesty commands me to say that you may 
absent yourself from Exiles for that purpose 
for a period of from fifteen days to three 
weeks." Even at the Isles, at first, Saint- 
Mars was comparatively at his ease. u The 
King consents to your taking a holiday two 
days in the month, and permits you to return 
the visit of the governor of Nice." These 
were the relaxations of the period when Saint- 
Mars had charge only of "two jail-birds." 

On a sudden, the 26th of February, 1694, 
there is a mandate from Versailles, inform- 



304 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

ing the commandant that three prisoners 
of State are to be sent from Pignerol to 
the Isles. The minister* enquires "if there 
are safe places to hold them," and bids 
the governor make all needful dispositions 
to receive them. A second letter, March 
the 20th, contains a passage of capital 
significance: "You know in effect that they 
are of greater consequence, at least one, 
than the prisoners now at the Isles ; and, 
preferably to those others, you should see 
that they are lodged in the most secure 
quarter of the prison. The courier who 
bears this despatch takes with him also 
fifteen hundred livres for preliminary ex- 
penses." 

Thus was announced the coming of 
Mattioli, with the two remaining prisoners 
of Pignerol. 

* This was Barbezieux, the successor of Louvois, who died 
in 1691. 



PRISONER OF CONSEQUENCE. 305 

The great Louis, who took his vengeances 
cruelly, was falling on his evil days. The 
disruption was beginning which should end in 
the cataract of the Revolution. In Italy 
the situation had been sadly modified since 
the epoch at which Louis had first sought 
to treat as autocrat for the purchase of 
Casale. He no longer spoke there with a 
master's voice ; " his arms had ceased to 
be ever-victorious, and he was already 
expiating his impolitic and inopportune 
intervention in the affairs of the Peninsula " 
Casale must be abandoned ; Pignerol, too — 
that " precious acquisition of Richelieu," 
which had been practically a French town 
for sixty years. 

Mattioli in the heart of his dungeon felt 
the effects of the King's reverses. The 
restoration of Pignerol by Louis explains 
his removal to the Isles. Once more, how- 
ever, a deep secrecy falls upon him ; he is 

20 



306 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

never at this time alluded to by name in 
the despatches. " Now more than ever, 
in a word, was it imperative to hide 
from the sight and knowledge of all, this 
victim of an audacious and inexcusable 
violation of the rights of men. Europe's 
discontent with Louis XIV. was extreme ; 
his interest lay in appeasing this discontent ; 
and in these circumstances it was of the last 
importance to cover with an impenetrable 
mystery an existence which recalled at once 
the dangerous ambition, the audacity, and — 
not less than these — the humbling of a great 
king." 

Never, accordingly, were such extra- 
ordinary precautions taken for a journey of 
this nature. The Marquis d'Herleville, 
governing the citadel of Pignerol, and the 
Comte de Tesse, commanding the French 
troops in that place, had orders " to furnish 
the escort, and the monies necessary for 



PRISONER OF CONSEQUENCE. 307 

the expenses of the road " ; and it was 
strictly enjoined upon de Tesse " that he 
should not seek to know the names of the 
prisoners." A strong escort was provided ; 
two sure guides were sent in advance ; and 
the governor of the dungeon of Pignerol 
went with the litter of the prisoners, with 
instructions to let no one but himself 
attend on them. Thus they came mys- 
teriously to the Isles. / 

In that litter so closely escorted, three 
prisoners fared, one of whom was of greater 
consequence than the others. Now, after the 
death of Fouquet and the release of Lauzun, 
there was not at Pignerol any considerable 
prisoner save Mattioli. Note, too, that when 
Saint-Mars went to Exiles, it was to 
Villebois that the charge of Mattioli was 
assigned — Villebois, who had shared with 
Catinat the mission of arresting him : further. 

that on the death of Villebois, it was another 

20* 



3 o8 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

of Saint- Mars's lieutenants, Laprade, who 
was sent from the Isles as governor of 
the dungeon of Pignerol. Saint-Mars had 
therefore not lost sight of his ancient 
prisoner ; he had been in touch with him 
throughout. At Exiles, and during the 
first period of his command at the Isles, 
Saint-Mars, with the King's permission, 
had quitted his charge when it pleased him : 
there comes from Pignerol this prisoner of 
consequence, and Saint-Mars leaves the 
Isles no more. " From this moment," says 
Topin, " Saint-Mars never stirs from his 
prison." At this time, too, Barbezieux, who 
has not until now displayed the least 
anxiety, is solicitous of knowing what would 
befall at the Isles should sickness overtake 
Saint-Mars. New measures of precaution 
are proposed by Saint- Mars, and approved 
by the minister. The bolts from the 
dungeon of Pignerol are sent to Sainte- 



PRISONER OF CONSEQUENCE. 309 

Marguerite. Time does not weaken this 
scrupulous watch, as appears by the follow- 
ing significant despatch from Versailles, 
November 17th, 1697: — 

" I have received with your letter of the 
10th of this month the copy of the one 
written you by Mons. de Ponchartrain con- 
cerning the prisoners who are at the Isles of 
Sainte-Marguerite, in accordance with the 
King's orders, signed by him or by the late 
Mons. de Seignelay. You have simply to 
address yourself to the safe keeping of all 
the persons entrusted to you, and to see 
that no one ever learns what your ancient 
prisoner has done." 

Can the words " your ancient prisoner " 
bear any meaning save one : a prisoner who 
was formerly in your keeping and who has 
again been confided to you ? The phrase 
could not possibly apply to the prisoner 
whom Saint-Mars had brought to the Isles, 



310 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

for he arrived there in 1687, and it was 
scarcely to be supposed that at the end of 
ten years the inhabitants of Sainte-Marguerite 
had grown suddenly curious as to the cause 
of his detention. But their curiosity was 
natural enough in respect of the three who 
had arrived in the midst of that formidable 
escort, for whose reception extensive pre- 
parations had been made, and one at least 
of whom had been lodged in the strongest 
part of the prison. 

The passage from Topin which follows 
seems definitely to clinch the argument : — 

" Pignerol was given up to the Duke of 
Savoy shortly after the arrival of the new 
prisoners at the Isles. I have searched 
during the ten years (1698- 1708) which fol- 
lowed the departure of Saint-Mars for the 
Bastille, all the despatches exchanged be- 
tween Lamothe-Guerin, his successor at the 
Isles, and the Court of Versailles. The 



PRISONER OF CONSEQUENCE. 311 

name of Mattioli is nowhere to be found in 
them, nor is there mention of any prisoner 
of importance left behind by Saint- Mars." 

We know that Mattioli was at Pignerol at 
the end of 1693 (only a few months before 
the removal of the three prisoners), for it 
was in December of that year — the 27th — 
that the minister was in communication with 
Laprade about the prisoner's attempt to write 
something on the lining of his clothes. The 
three who were transferred in 1694 were all 
old prisoners of Saint- Mars, and Mattioli 
alone among them possessed any considera- 
tion. When, therefore, Saint-Mars is strictly 
bidden to keep from everyone the know- 
ledge of " what your ancient prisoner has 
done," there is but one conclusion to draw 
— that the reference is to the affair which 
Versailles continued to call " the treason of 
Count Mattioli." 



312 



CHAPTER IX. 

Both at the Isles and in the 

The 

SiIver Bastille, the life of Mattioli — if 
Dish • life it may be called — seems to 
have been as wretched, as inexpressibly 
blank, as in the dungeon of Pignerol. 
The despatches say nothing more of mad- 
ness ; but, by the time he came to the 
Isles, Mattioli had suffered during fifteen 
years a form of captivity which might have 
shattered, and which must certainly have 
enfeebled, the very strongest intellect. One 
of the most grievous pains of imprisonment 
under the old regime must have been the 
total lack of profitable or engaging employ- 
ment. The tasks of prison, during a long 



THE SILVER DISH. 313 

sentence of penal servitude, are seldom 
cheerful, and cannot but be monotonous ; but 
they do at least fill the greater portion of 
the convict's life, they stay his mind from 
too much brooding, and they offer to in- 
dustry a means of climbing from an inferior 
to a higher class. But the prisoners of State 
under the French monarchy had no tasks, 
and could only with difficulty create their 
occupations or their recreations. And the 
history of Mattioli is desolate above the 
average. If his mind were not dead within 
him, his existence during all those years is 
terrible to contemplate. Guiding ourselves 
solely by the light of proved despatches, re- 
jecting absolutely all such evidence as will 
not stand that test, we find scarcely a trace 
of solace or relief in that protracted martyr- 
dom. A few " books of devotion," grudg- 
ingly doled out ; the yearly visit of a priest : 
that is all. In this respect, as in others, 



314 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

the history of Mattioli is nearly without a 
parallel. Of how many prisoners of State 
is it recorded that, during a captivity of 
years, they neither found nor were granted 
any means of softening the unutterable soli- 
tude of prison ? Fouquet read and wrote ; 
procured herbs and plants from the hills, and 
dabbled in pharmacy ; and was at last united 
to his family. Mirabeau in Vincennes com- 
posed that devastating essay on Lettres de 
Cachet which foreshadowed the Revolution. 
Conde cultivated pinks. Cardinal de Retz 
played chess, and received his friends. 
Trenck carved scrolls and mottoes on his cups. 
Voltaire polished verses. Pellisson's spider 
is famed. Latude and others tamed pigeons, 
rats, and mice. Bunyan and Cervantes found 
an immortality in the dungeon. The annals 
of the Bastille embrace one dainty love affair, 
that of Mdlle. de Launay (the Madame de 
Staal that should be) and the young Chevalier 



THE SILVER DISH. 315 

de Menil. Diderot in Vincennes received 
the visits of Rousseau and D'Alembert, and 
talked Plato and Socrates with them in the 
garden. In days near our own, Louis 
Napoleon called the fortress of Ham his 
University. Even in the prisons of Russia, 
within the stretch of recent memory, prisoners 
of both sexes have contrived to communicate 
freely by means of a pre-arranged code of 
raps. 

But between Mattioli and all the living, 
the gulf is absolute. Four-and-twenty years 
revolve for him in a silence almost un- 
broken. Intellect and the " life of life in 
the heart " must staunch and be swallowed 
up in that appalling and incredible sterility 
of existence. Time scarcely modifies in any 
degree the pitiless character of his captivity. 
During four-and-twenty years he seems not 
to have seen one friendly face ; and it is 
almost certain that not a message ever 



316 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

reached him from the world which he had 
lost. 

One day in those loathed seats was the 
pattern of all. Saint-Mars has left us in a 
letter to Barbezieux a precise account of the 
manner in which, when he was ill or other- 
wise engaged, his lieutenants waited on the 
prisoners : — 

" The first of my lieutenants, 

who takes the keys of the prison ot my 
ancient prisoner, with whom we commence, 
opens the three doors and goes in. The 
prisoner politely hands him the plates and 
dishes, laid one on another, and the lieutenant 
has only to pass through two doors to give 
them to one of my sergeants, who places them 
on a table two steps away, where is the second 
lieutenant, who examines everything that 
comes into and goes out of the prison, and 
sees that nothing has been written on any 
of the vessels. After they have given him 



THE SILVER DISH. 317 

the utensil, they make a thorough examina- 
tion of the bed, then of the gratings and 
windows of the room ; and very often the 
prisoner himself is searched. After enquiring 
civilly whether he wants anything, they lock 
the doors, and visit the other prisoners in 
like manner." 

The " ancient prisoner," Mattioli, is here 
in the strictest solitary confinement, and it 
is evident that these perfunctory visits of 
Saint-Mars or his lieutenant — with the 
humiliating accompaniment of the daily search 
— represent his sole intercourse with his 
fellow-men. An existence so barren, so 
deadly drear, as that of a Mattioli or a 
Prisoner of Chillon, may be a fit theme for 
tragic poetry, but is of little service to the 
makers of romance. Fable accordingly has 
always been extremely busy with this prisoner 
of Saint-Mars, who was for generations the 
most mysterious creature in history. Things 



3i8 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

true or partly true of other prisoners have 
grouped themselves around his memory ; 
other things speak only for the imagination 
of their inventors. The legend of the silver 
dish (which includes Papon's variation) be- 
longs to the period of Sainte-Marguerite. 
Already referred to, it has a foundation in 
fact, but does not touch the history of the 
Mask. The revocation of the Edict of 
Nantes, in 1685, had filled the prisons of 
Louis XIV. with those French Protestants 
and their clergy who had not fled the 
country; and many ministers of the proscribed 
faith were sent from time to time to Sainte- 
Marguerite. It was through one of these 
prisoners for his faith that the tale of the 
" silver dish " arose. A certain Salves, un- 
known to history in any other relation, is the 
source it traces from. Along with a com- 
panion unnamed, Salves fell in trouble with 
Saint-Mars, who, in accordance with his 



THE SILVER DISH. 3 '9 

invariable rule, posted the matter to Ver- 
sailles. Nothing escaped Saint-Mars ; for 
what he did not see his lieutenants did not 
dare to withhold from him ; and all went in 
detail to the King. 

" The first of the Protestant ministers who 
have been sent here," he wrote (June 4th, 
1692), " sings psalms night and day at the 
top of his voice, to let it be known who and 
what he is. I forbade him several times, on 
pain of punishment ; and I have had to 
punish him at last. I have taken a similar 
course with his comrade Salves, who has a 
mania for scribbling, and who has written 
things on his pewter vessels and on his linen, 
to publish it that he is imprisoned unjustly 
for his religion." 

Out of this petty memorandum from the 
gaoler to the minister two writers have 
furnished the most sensational incident in 
the legend of the Iron Mask. Voltaire's 



3 2o THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

fisherman came off with his life, it is true : 
Pere Papon's monk did not ; and there are 
so few points at which the memory of 
Saint-Mars makes appeal to us that it is 
grateful to spare him the charge of that 
imaginary murder. 

With the story of the silver dish is linked, 
in the popular fancy, the story of the laces 
and fine linen. There is not a hint of 
this in the despatches, and nothing that 
Saint-Mars omits to mention is to be 
received ; for he is little less than childish 
in his incessant appeals to Versailles on 
every point that concerns even the obscurest 
of his prisoners. It is a corollary of Voltaire's 
libel on Anne of Austria, but it has not the 
basis even of that remote history of the silver 
dish. A solitary figment of Voltaire, it goes 
with the rest of his invention. The first 
order of Louis XIV. will be remembered, that 
Mattioli should have nothing " except the 



THE SILVER DISH. 321 

absolute necessaries of life " — among which 
it is improbable that either Louis or Louvois 
would include the frills and laces of the age. 

Point by point, what is legendary in the 
record of the Mask gives place to history. 
Tradition has found him with a guitar, and 
old prints depict it ; but every picture of 
the Man in the Mask is a fantasy, and 
no guitar passed unsanctioned into any 
prison of Saint- Mars. 

To the fifteen disintegrating years in 
Pignerol were joined four at the Isles of 
Sainte-Marguerite ; day yielding ever to 
night in the prisoner's life through all that 
tragic cycle. And fate had not yet done 
with him. 



2 1 



3 22 



CHAPTER X. 

On the first of March, 1698, 
Saint-Mars received from Versailles 

comes 

to the the offer of the government of 
the Bastille. The salary was rich, 
the office one of trust and dignity, and 
Paris was Paris : Saint-Mars accepted the 
offer at once. Nothing further passed until 
the 17th of June, when Barbezieux wrote 
again from Versailles : — 

" I have been long in answering your 
letter of the 8th of last month, as the King 
had not explained his intentions to me. I 
am now to inform you that his Majesty 
is pleased at your acceptance of the govern- 
ment of the Bastille. You can have 
everything in train to be ready to start 



THE MASK COMES TO THE BASTILLE. 323 

when you receive the final word ; and 
bring with you in all security your ancient 
prisoner. 

" I have arranged with Mons. Saumery 
to give you two thousand crowns for the 
transport of your effects. " 

On the 19th of July there came a third 
despatch from Barbezieux, confirming what 
had gone before, and emphasising the 
importance of guarding the prisoner on the 
journey " in such a manner that he shall 
be seen by no one." Two months later, 
in the middle of September, when the days 
were shortening, Saint-Mars set out with 
him to traverse the whole of France. At 
this point the reflection arises that had the 
affair of the Mask been a scandal of the 
Court, and the prisoner a person whose 
features revealed a royal origin, it would 
have been strangely and curiously impru- 
dent to bring him to a dungeon in the 



21* 



324 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

heart of Paris — where chance might so much 
more easily discover him than in that dis- 
tant fastness lapped by the Sea of Provence- 
There could be no grave reason why the 
Italian Mattioli should not be carried to 
the Bastille ; there was every prudent reason 
of State why a brother of the King should 
not be carried there. But, as we shall 
see, it was unquestionably the Man in 
the Mask who made the journey with Saint- 
Mars. 

A glance at the map of France will show 
what a journey this was at the jog-trot 
pace of the litter. No detailed itinerary 
exists, but we know where the principal halt 
was made. In the central department of 
Yonne is the town of Villeneuve-le-Roi, once 
called the Ante-room of the Popes, now 
desolate and lifeless. Near Villeneuve is the 
chateau of Palteau, a property belonging to 
Saint-Mars, and here he halted with his 



THE MASK COMES TO THE BASTILLE. 327 

prisoner. * Reference has been made in the 
Introduction to the letter of M. de For- 
manoir de Palteau, grand-nephew of Saint- 
Mars, in which this episode is described. 
The letter, bearing date June 19, 1768, was 

* Saint-Mars was not the man to loiter on the road, with a prisoner 
of State in his keeping, and it is unlikely that the stay at Palteau ex- 
ceeded a night or two. But wherever the Masked Man came legend 
laid hold upon his memory, and Villeneuve-le-Roi has appropriated 
him. There is in Villeneuve a vast old ruined fort, with castellated 
drum-towers, and cells and chambers in abundance. Now Saint-Mars 
and the Mask would probably take Villeneuve on their way to Palteau ; 
at all events, that close-guarded litter, watched with an awful wonder 
from Provence to Paris, must have passed very near. What more apt 
than to imagine for the Mask a period of captivity in the fort of Vil- 
leneuve-le-Roi ! It has been done. In a pleasant volume of wander- 
ings, " In the Rhone Valley , " Mr. Charles W. Wood tells how he was 
shown the cell by a nun, as her piece de resistance. " Most interesting 
of all was a small remote doorway, and the nun looked wonderfully 
picturesque as she bent down and applied the key to the lock, her black 
graceful dress standing out in strange contrast with the ancient and 
splendid masonry. Then she threw open the door and we entered a 
dark circular chamber that was half cell. In tones that thrilled her 
hearers and echoed in the roof, she said : ' This is the room in 
which the Man with the Iron Mask was confined, before he was 
taken to another and more open part of the fort.'" Mr. Wood, 
accepting the statement in good faith, adds: "We almost felt on 
sacred ground." 



328 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

addressed to Freron, of the Annee Litt'eraire, 
and published in the issue of June 30. 

" In 1698, " writes M. de Palteau, " M. de 
Saint-Mars passed from the charge of the 
Isles of Sainte-Marguerite to that of the 
Bastille. On his way, he stayed with his 
prisoner on his estate at Palteau. The Man 
in the Mask came in a litter which preceded 
that of M. de Saint-Mars ; they were 
accompanied by several men on horseback. 
The peasants went to greet their lord ; 
M. de Saint-Mars took his meals with his 
prisoner, who was placed with his back to 
the windows of the dining-room which over- 
looked the courtyard. The peasants whom 
I questioned could not see whether he wore 
his mask while eating, but they took note of 
the fact that M. de Saint-Mars, who sat 
opposite to him, kept a pair of pistols beside 
his plate. They were waited on by one 
man-servant, who fetched the dishes from 



THE MASK COMES TO THE BASTILLE. 329 

the ante-room where they were brought to 
him, taking care to close behind him the 
door of the dining-room. When the prisoner 
crossed the courtyard, he aways wore the 
black mask ; the peasants noticed that his 
teeth and lips showed through it ; * also 
that he was tall and had white hair. M. de 
Saint-Mars slept in a bed close to that of the 
masked man." 

There could be nothing simpler than this 
statement. The writer has no hypothesis of 
his own, and no leaning towards any other 
hypothesis. He is content to report what he 
had learned by word of mouth from the old 
people on the estate who had actually seen the 
prisoner in the mask at Palteau.f The detail 
of chief importance in the account is the mask ; 

* Clearly, the little velvet half-mask which may be seen to-day at 
any bal masque in Carnival. 

t The chateau of Palteau still stands where it did. The dining-hall 
in which Saint-Mars faced his prisoner, with pistols by his side, is 
now, says M. Funck-Brentano, a kitchen. 



33o THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

and this is verified by the entry in Du Junca's 
journal, when the veiled prisoner arrives at the 
Bastille. We have kept touch of this prisoner 
so far, and have found under his velvet mask 
no features but those of Mattioli. A prisoner 
of particular consequence is transferred from 
Pignerolto the Isles, and at the date of his 
removal there is only Mattioli of consequence 
in that prison. His name ceases, but he is 
identified with the "ancient prisoner" of sub- 
sequent despatches. This " ancient prisoner " 
is the one whom Saint-Mars is instructed to 
carry from the Isles to the Bastille. The 
prisoner alights at Palteau, and it is observed 
by the peasants on the estate that he wears a 
mask. The journey ends at the Bastille ; and 
Du Junca, the King's Lieutenant of the prison, 
notes in his journal that the prisoner whom 
Saint-Mars brings from the Isles is an ancient 
prisoner whom he had at Pignerol, and that 
he is masked. Even in the Paris of that day 



THE MASK COMES TO THE BASTILLE. 331 

the use of the mask was not unknown ; but 
there is absolutely no other instance in French 
history of its employment to conceal the 
identity of a prisoner : hence the naive wonder 
which may be read between the lines of 
Du Junca's entry. 

This note in the register or journal kept by 
the King's Lieutenant of the Bastille is, as 
M. Funck-Brentano observes, " the origin and 
foundation of all that has been printed on the 
question of the Iron Mask." The journal itself 
(the original is in the Arsenal Library) is the 
work of an unlettered official who spells 
atrociously, and knows nothing of punctua- 
tion. When a new prisoner was received 
Du Junca wrote down the particulars of his 
coming, and the first of the entries with which 
this history is concerned is as follows, in a 
translation as literal as possible. 

" On Thursday, 18th September (1698), at 
three in the afternoon, M. de Saint-Mars, go- 



LP 



332 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

vernor of the chateau of the Bastille, presented 
himself for the first time, coming from his 
government of the Isles of Sainte-Marguerite- 
Honorat, having with him in his litter a pri- 
soner who was formerly in his keeping at Pig- 
nerol, whom he caused to be always masked, 
whose name is not mentioned : on descending 
from the litter, he had him placed in the first 
chamber of the Baziniere tower, waiting until 
night for me to take him, at nine o'clock, and 
put him with M. de Rosarges, one of the ser- 
geants brought by the governor, alone in the 
third chamber of the Bertaudiere tower, which 
I had had duly furnished some days before his 
arrival, by order of M. de Saint-Mars : the 
aforesaid prisoner will be served and seen to 
by M. de Rosarges, and maintained by the 
overnor." 

Such is the famous entry which records the 
coming of the Mask to the Bastille. He 
passed in there as mysteriously as he had 




r 












bjM* 



°XL- 












y? Jaj<ms~ 



\ogt{v-~- le?* 







Entry in the Register of the Bastille. 

By the courtesy of Messrs. Downey and Co. 



THE MASK COMES TO THE BASTILLE. 335 

entered Pignerol nineteen years earlier, and 
the Isles in 1694. That the staff of the Bastille 
had not the least idea who he was is rendered 
certain by the names he received from them. 
He was " the Prisoner from Provence," most 
often ; sometimes " the ancient prisoner " — 
the term so closely identified with Mattioli. 
It is clear that at first his isolation was 
as rigorous as it had ever been. Rosarges 
alone waited on him. No fellow-prisoner 
shared his captivity in the third chamber 
of the Bertaudiere tower. What tales 
would filter through the Bastille, what 
fables would begin to grow around him, 
even while he sat there — the unknown who 
wore the mask ! 

But time was passing even for the Man 
in the Mask. Casale was no longer 
French ; the negotiations which had issued 
so fatefully for Mattioli were old history ; 
the whole affair was out of mind : its 



336 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

importance had utterly ceased. Note how 
this affected the Mask in 1701, twenty-two 
years after he had been thrown into Pignerol. 
No pardon came for him, nor was he granted 
the ease in his dungeon which was allowed 
at last to Fouquet. His fate was infinitely 
more pitiful ; he fell from his estate in the 
prison, he was degraded among the com- 
monest of the Bastille's inmates. 

He had been confined in the third chamber 
of the Bertaudiere tower. From this he was 
removed, the 6th of March, 1701, to make 
room for one Anne Randon, " devineresse 
et diseuse de bonne fortune," witch and for- 
tune-teller : the Man in the Mask displaced 
by a common sorceress ! He was then put 
by Du Junca, whose Journal is the authority, 
into " the second Bertaudiere," which he 
shared with a certain Thirmont or Tirmont. 
This man, embastilled in July, 1700, had 
been a domestic servant ; he was only nine- 



THE MASK COMES TO THE BASTILLE. 337 

teen years of age, and had been accused of 
atheism and black magic, and of corrupting 
young girls : quite an ordinary type of the 
rogue and charlatan of the age. Some six 
weeks later these two were joined by a 
third prisoner. The entry is in Du Junca's 
Journal. " Saturday, April 30, at about nine 
in the evening, M. Aumont the younger 
came, bringing with him and handing over 
to us a prisoner named M. Maranville, but 
calling himself Ricarville, formerly an officer 
in the army, a malcontent, a tattler, and a 
rake ; whom I received by the King's orders, 
sent through the Comte de Pontchartrain, 
and placed with the man Tirmont, in the 
second chamber of the Bertaudiere tower, 
along with the ancient prisoner, both being 
under lock and key." 

The Bastille of this date held accommo- 
dation for no more than forty-two prisoners, 

separately confined. In 1701 it was exces- 

22 



338 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

sively full, and three prisoners were locked 
into one chamber : the servant Tirmont ; 
Maranville alias Ricarville, whom the police re- 
port described as " of a beggarly appearance " ; 
and the Man in the Mask. In October, 1708, 
Maranville was sent from the Bastille to 
Charenton prison, where he died. Tirmont 
was transferred in December, 1701, to the 
horrible Bicetre, half-prison, half-madhouse. 
He became insane two years later, and died 
in 1709. 

Now, for a moment, let this situation of 
the Mask, cheek by jowl with this sorry 
pair, be considered in the light of the 
Legend. It is an awkward situation for the 
Legend ! The prisoner has been immured 
twenty-two years, in a seclusion the strictest 
and most cruel, his name and his identity 
withheld from everyone, for the reason that he 
is the depository of some tremendous secret 
of the State. He has been hidden under a 



THE MASK COMES TO THE BASTILLE. 339 

mask all this time, because, forsooth, if he 
were not so disguised, he would be recog- 
nised as the brother of Louis XIV. And lo ! 
this holder of the dread secret, this royal 
twin or bastard who so fatally resembles the 
King, is suddenly sent to keep company with 
two gaol-birds of the Bastille. The prison 
becomes crowded, a lady in trouble for 
telling fortunes is among the new arrivals ; 
and of so much greater consequence is she 
than this redoubtable prisoner who has been 
under seal for two-and-twenty years, that his 
room in the Bertaudiere is immediately 
assigned to her. The fortune-teller has the 
dignity of a separate chamber ; the Mask is 
thrust in with the lackey Tirmont, and 
Maranville presently makes a third. The 
two common fellows are bye-and-bye moved 
from the Bastille — having had the fullest op- 
portunity of learning and disseminating that 
stupendous secret. This is not a little curious 



34o THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

— considered in the light of the Legend. 
What, indeed, becomes of the Legend ? 

But if the reader is with us in this inquiry, 
with Delort and Topin and M. Funck- 
Brentano, this decline in importance of the 
prisoner who had hitherto been all-important 
has already received its explanation. With 
the lapse of time, the man and the political 
intrigue he had been concerned in had quite 
ceased to be of consequence to anybody. 
Mattioli had no secret to reveal. Should 
he divulge the affair of Casale ? No one at 
that date would have been a penny the 
worse. Should he speak of his long and 
torturing captivity ? Alas ! captivities as harsh 
as his were none so rare at that era : pity 
indeed the tale might excite ; it could excite 
no extreme degree of wonder. In fine, at 
the epoch of 1701 the prisoner of the Mask 
had nothing to communicate which could 
disturb for an instant the repose of Ver- 



THE MASK COMES TO THE BASTILLE. 341 

sailles ; — and they suffered him to sink to the 
level of those vulgar delinquents who passed 
in and out of the Bastille. 

This fact, which we owe to M. Funck- 
Brentano's scrutiny of the Journal of Du 
Junca, disposes of the interesting tale that, 
after the prisoner's death, everything in his 
room was burned, " linen, clothes, cushions and 
counterpanes " ; the flooring taken up and 
the walls scraped and whitewashed again. 
We have just seen his room in the occu- 
pation of the adventuress Randon, which 
would be upon the order of Saint-Mars ; 
and that heedful man is not at all concerned 
to know whether his prisoner — who may 
henceforth be shifted anywhere — has left 
behind him any trace of his identity. Were 
this anything but fiction, it would be found 
in Du Junca. He is a Pepys in minuteness 
whenever he finds matter for his pen ; his 
details of the prisoner's death in 1703 are 



342 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

precise, but he has nothing else to tell. 
If, after the prisoner's death, his cell had been 
even whitewashed, we should have learned 
it from Du Junca, who wrote everything that 
came to his knowledge, but with no more 
notion than Pepys that he was writing for 
posterity. The story, in fact, traces, through 
Pere Griffet, to a Major of the Bastille, 
Chevalier by name, who did not come upon 
the scene until 1749. For many years it was 
accepted, but it vanishes in the search-light 
of M. Funck-Brentano, and is now but an 
item of the Legend. It is self-evident that 
there was no motive for destroying the traces 
of a prisoner who, two years before his death, 
had been given ample opportunity to reveal 
himself, and who was thenceforth insignificant. 
This tragedy was now very near its closing 
scene. So far as records are concerned, the 
two remaining years are blank ; and the 
imagination does not willingly attempt to 



THE MASK COMES TO THE BASTILLE. 343 

re-create them. For the spectacle of the 
Mask degraded from his eminence of mystery 
cast unregarded among the coarser tenants 
of his dungeon, affects the mind, perhaps, 
even more painfully than the vision of him, 
solitary in his Alpine cell, or vainly inter- 
rogating the waters of the Isles ; narrowly 
surveyed, the veritable prisoner of State. 
Hope must have fled him for years ; we do 
not find him petitioning Louis, or appealing 
to Charles of Mantua : he sat " with close- 
lipped patience," or, if patience had not found 
him, it were better to know nothing of what 
passed within that lonely brain. 

Under date of the 19th of November, 
1703, Du Junca wrote, in the Register which 
he reserved for entries of the death or 
liberation of prisoners of the Bastille * : — 

"The same day, November 19th, 1703, the 
prisoner unknown, masked always with a 

* The translation is as literal as is possible. 



344 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

mask of black velvet, whom M. de Saint- 
Mars, the governor, brought with him from 
the Isles of Sainte-Marguerite, and whom he 
had had for a long time, happening to be 
rather unwell yesterday on coming from mass, 
died this day at about ten o'clock in the 
evening, without having had any serious 
illness ; indeed it could not have been slighter. 
M. Giraut, our chaplain, confessed him yes- 
terday, and is surprised at his death. He 
did not receive the sacrament, and our 
chaplain exhorted him a moment before he 
died. And this unknown prisoner, confined 
so long a time, was buried on Tuesday at 
four in the afternoon, in the cemetery of 
St. Paul, our parish ; on the register of 
burial he was given a name also unknown. 
M. de Rosarges, major, and Arreil, surgeon, 
signed the register." 

A marginal note to the left of the entry 
ran as follows : — 




~jv.i>^w/ &&$ Hoc* <fhuy 

if 7tef?wri4: nwiu-pU. &srf*c^ 
. T7V0 7nm4r a^u^vd f/usfc. ****** 



,$771. 



71*4. 



•<nvQ^$- 7 g»<QcnL>ru_ ,iptl tz^ttl- a*Ayfac67i*> 



Entry in the Register of Saint Paul's. 

By the courtesy of Messrs. Downey and Co. 



THE MASK COMES TO THE BASTILLE. 347 

" I have since learnt that he was named 
on the register M. de Marchiel, and that the 
burial cost 40 livres." 

The entry in the register of Saint Paul's, 
discovered later, reads : — 

"On the 19th (1703) Marchioly, aged 
forty-five or thereabouts, died in the Bastille, 
whose body was buried in the churchyard 
of St Paul, his parish, the 20th of this 
month, in the presence of M. Rosage (sic), 
major of the Bastille, and M. Reglhe (sic) 
surgeon major of the Bastille, who signed.— 
" Signed : Rosarges, Reilhe." 

The written names in the entry are 
examples of the slovenly, inaccurate spelling 
of the age. The person who sets them 
down is ignorant even of the names of the 
two officers of the Bastille by whom his 
register is signed : Rosarges is " Rosage," 



348 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

Reilhe is " Reglhe." " Marchioly " is re- 
markably close to Mattioli when it is re- 
membered that Saint-Mars would probably 
have given the name by word of mouth ; 
it is still closer if he spoke it, as he often 
wrote it in his despatches — " Martioly " in- 
stead of Mattioli. In the despatches of 
Louvois it is sometimes " Marthioly," which, 
with the difference of a letter, is the name 
on the register. In others, it is " Matioli," 
" Matheoli," &c. All proper names were 
stumbling-blocks to the writers of despatches 
in that era ; whether educated like Louvois, 
half-educated like Saint-Mars, or as totally 
unlettered as Du Junca. 

The age assigned to the prisoner, "forty- 
five or thereabouts" instances again the utter 
indifference and lack of care with which 
these entries were made. Probably, how- 
ever, no one in the Bastille, not even Saint- 
Mars, knew Mattioli's age. Born in 1640, 



THE MASK COMES TO THE BASTILLE. 349 

he was sixty-three at the date of his death. 
According to Delort, he told the apothecary 
of the Bastille that he was sixty ; a close 
guess for one who had lost count of time for 
near a quarter of a century. 

So fades and vanishes that tragic figure. 



35° 



CHAPTER XI. 

If there had been no mask in 
the case ? The fascination of the 
history has centred there. Had Saint-Mars 
not carried his prisoner from the Isles to the 
Bastille in that provoking domino, his story, 
like enough, had never engaged the curiosity 
of the world. Stories as sinister and sad 
have oozed from the shades of the Bastille, 
of the Conciergerie, of Bicetre, of the 
Chatelet — stories which never had audience, 
or which have lain for generations among 
forgotten things. But the mask has per- 
petuated itself; and, so simple as it proves, 
it has kept alive, through an infinity of 
changes, the memory of the prisoner whom 
it hid. 



Q. E. D. 35 1 

And the mask was really nothing. 

From the instrument of torture invented 
by Voltaire, it shrinks to the little fashion- 
able shield of black velvet which every 
Italian gentleman had in his wardrobe ; 
which was de rigueur in Carnival time ; and 
which both Mattioli and the Duke of 
Mantua used as a matter of course in their 
private interviews with d'Estrades. In the 
Legend, the mask is everything : in the 
true, documentary history of the Masked 
Man it figures scarcely at all. We know 
from Du Junca's Journal that the prisoner 
was masked when he entered the Bastille ; 
but this is the first official notice on the 
subject. No document attests that he wore 
the mask at Pignerol or at the Isles. 
Saint-Mars does not anywhere allude to it ; 
nor is there any injunction about a mask in 
any despatch from Versailles. Louis XIV. 
never gave the order which has been attri- 



352 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

buted to him ; Louvois never gave it ; Bar- 
bezieux never gave it. Up to the date of 
the entry into the Bastille, the mask seems 
to have been not much more than an acci- 
dent of the history ; there is only the 
statement in the Prudenza trionfante di 
Casale that the prisoner was masked by the 
persons who arrested him. 

We have it from Du Junca that in the 
Bastille the prisoner was " masked always." 
Without the least straining at the facts 
this may be interpreted to mean that he 
wore his mask whenever there was occa- 
sion for him to be seen. And this the 
prisoner may have done of choice ; there 
are times and seasons in prison when it 
would be a convenience and a relief to 
possess this ready means of disguising one- 
self. 

Pere Griffet, chaplain of the Bastille in 
1745, observes in his Methode de Fhistoire: 



G. & D. 353 

V There is nothing to show that he was 
obliged to wear his mask when alone in 
his chamber, or in the presence of de 
Rosarges or the governor, by whom he 
was perfectly well known." If compelled 
to wear it at all, " it would only be when 
he crossed the courtyard to attend mass, 
in order that he might not be recognised 
by the sentinels, or when some person on 
the staff, not privy to the secret, was sent 
into his chamber." On the whole, it might 
be conjectured that the mask was an in- 
spiration of Saint-Mars when he fetched 
his prisoner from the Isles to the Bastille, 
and that it was afterwards adopted by the 
prisoner himself, who secured thereby the 
slight liberty or relief of the incognito. 

But, let the origin of its employment 
have been what it may, this velvet vizor 
was to bear a part not less than astonish- 
ing in the fable of the Masked Man. 

23 



354 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

This was not only natural, but, in a sense, 
inevitable. I believe that the Legend 
itself had no other genesis than the 
mystery of the mask. The sense of 
surprise which it produced in Du Junca 
was immediately communicated to the 
whole staff of the Bastille. Time flowed, 
but the mask was still the great memory 
and tradition of the fortress. The prisoner 
himself—" Marchiel," " Marchioly," Mattioli 
— remained unknown : Du Junca's Journal 
was not yet laid bare, the St. Paul's 
register was a sealed book, the State 
documents had not become the nation's 
property. But the steady, continuous, and 
provocative tradition of the mask lived on 
within the walls of the Bastille. There 
it was found by the many students, 
philosophers, and men of letters who lay 
behind those bolts for longer or shorter 
terms in the eighteenth century. Voltaire 



Q. E- £>. 355 

was imprisoned in the Bastille in 17 17, 
and again, for a few days (most unjustly), 
in 1726. Here, in the very theatre of 
the mystery, these inquisitive keen minds 
got the earliest inkling of it ; and one 
poor shred of fact was even then gather- 
ing to itself both surmise and invention. 
It is an officer of the Bastille who sees 
in imagination the stripping and rehabili- 
tating of the prisoner's cell : where, then, 
would the flight of a Voltaire end ? : — whose 
was the face beneath the mask ? The men 
of letters, released from the Bastille, fastened 
on this rare enigma ; and those among 
them who saw here a means of involving 
in new discredit the imperious sovereignty 
of Louis XIV., rose gladly to the oppor- 
tunity. The mask, and the reason of the 
mask : these were the things to account 
for. So, unquestionably, did the Legend 

begin to be. 

23 * 



356 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

But now, at last, was Mattioli indeed 
the man ? It was objected to Topin, that 
the complete silence on this subject of the 
copious Saint-Simon (who has peeped into 
almost every cupboard in the Court of 
Louis XIV.) made an important count 
against him. Topin shrewdly saw that 
Saint-Simon's silence made, not against, 
but for him. " That immortal gossip has 
in truth lighted up for us the very holes 
and corners of Louis XIV.'s Court. From 
its pettiest shifts to its innermost intrigues, 
nothing has escaped him ; nothing that had 
to do with inner France. But of foreign 
affairs he knew only those that concerned 
the end of the reign, when they were in 
the hands of his friend the Marquis de 
Torcy. Earlier than this, he was as igno- 
rant of what passed beyond the borders of 
France as he was intimate with everything 
that passed within them. His silence, then, 



Q. E. D. 357 

which would be more than strange if it 
were possible to trace the Mask to a 
family of France, is its own interpreta- 
tion if the prisoner were a foreigner, 
arrested beyond the French frontier, and 
as early as 1679." * 

This is distinctly suggestive ; though, as 
testimony, it has of course, only a negative 
value. We come closer. At whatever point 
in the enquiry the mysterious prisoner is 
named, there has Mattioli been found ; and 
to no other among the prisoners of Saint- 
Mars has the term proved applicable. The 
political role of Mattioli has been defined, 
the circumstances set forth in which he fell 
under the vengeance of Louis XIV., and 
incurred that terrible punishment — inflicted, 
as Maurice Boutry says, " dans si grand 
secret." We have the King's order for his 
arrest with the particular injunction that no 

* Topin. 



358 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

one is ever to know what becomes of him ; 
we have Catinat's report of the seizure of 
Mattioli, so well contrived that even the 
officers who assisted him were ignorant of 
the prisoner's name ; we have the witness 
of the Prudenza trionfante di C as ale, in 
which the transaction is described from 
the beginning. This was the man whom 
Louis XIV. destined to end his life in 
prison, and from the hour that he entered 
Pignerol he has been observed, followed, 
step by step, to the night of his death in the 
Bastille. 

But this is not all. The proof does not 
end here. It is shown in the Journal of 
Du Junca that the prisoner whom Saint-Mars 
brought masked from the Isles was an ancient 
prisoner who had been in his keeping at 
Pignerol, the first of Mattioli's three dungeons, 
and the one in which he remained when other 
prisoners were transferred with Saint- Mars 



Q. E. D. 361 

to Exiles. Du Junca has made Pignerol 
essential in the history of the Mask. We 
come now to the axiomatic proof of M. Funck- 
Brentano. The reader was asked to bear 
in mind the despatch of Louvois to Saint- 
Mars (June 9, 1 681) enclosing instructions 
for the journey of the two prisoners who were 
to be taken from Pignerol to Exiles. The 
despatch speaks then of the prisoners who 
were left, and their number is precisely 
shown, the Sieur du Chamoy having orders to 
pay " two crowns a day for the maintenance 
of these three prisoners" It is certain then 
that there were just five prisoners in Pignerol 
on the eve of Saint-Mars's departure for 
Exiles, and since we know from Du Junca 
that the Mask was an old prisoner of Saint- 
Mars at Pignerol, it is among these five that 
we must inevitably find him. All the five 
are known to us ; their names have happened 
in these pages : — 



362 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

THE FIVE PRISONERS. THEIR FATE. 

Eustache Dauger. A prisoner of so little conse- 

quence that he was assigned as a 
servant to Fouquet in Pignerol, 
while Mattioli, in the same prison, 
was still in the strictest seclusion. 

La Riviere. Died in December, 1686. 

The Jacobin. Died at the close of 1693. 

Dubreuil. Died at the Isles, 1697. 

Mattioli. 

A Euclid could give the result no plainer. 
As M. Funck-Brentano observes, with a just 
complacency, it is mathematical. There are 
five : the first is dismissed on his merits ; 
the three that follow are dead before Saint- 
Mars sets out for the Bastille — and Mattioli 
alone remains. De facto, it was Mattioli 
whom Saint-Mars conveyed in the mask from 
the Isles of Sainte-Marguerite to the Bastille 
in 1698. Mattioli was the hidden prisoner 
whom we have kept touch of throughout. 



Q. E. D. 3 6 3 

There are two very curious corrobora- 
tions of the documentary evidence, deriving 
their value from the fact that they antedate 
by many years the earliest mention of the 
name of Mattioli. The last King of France 
who appears to have known the history was 
Louis XV. Importuned by the Due de 
Choiseul to reveal the prisoner's name, the 
King would only say that ''all the con- 
jectures which had been made hitherto upon 
this subject were false." Madame de Pom- 
padour was then engaged to press for a 
definite reply ; and the King at last informed 
her that the prisoner of the mask was the 
" Minister of an Italian Prince" * 

Still more explicit is Madame Campan, in 
the Memoirs of Marie Antoinette. During 
the first few months of his reign Louis XVI. 

* Dutens : La Correspondance Intercepts. On the other hand, in 
the "Memoirs " of Baron de Gleichen, Louis XV. is represented as 
refusing to give up the secret. If he knew it, there was no reason 
why, at this date, he should not give it up. 



364 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

was much occupied, says Madame Campan, 
with the revision of his grandfather's papers. 
He had promised to share with the Queen 
" whatever he might find upon the history 
of the Man with the Iron Mask, who, he 
thought, had become so inexhaustible a 
source of conjecture merely because of the 
interest which a celebrated writer had 
excited in the detention of a prisoner of 
State." 

" I was with the Queen," continues Madame 
Campan, " when the King, having finished 
his researches, told her that he had found 
nothing in the secret papers which bore 
in any way on the existence of this prisoner ; 
that he had referred to M. de Maurepas, 
whose age brought him nearer the time 
when the affair must have been known 
to the ministers, and that M. de Maurepas 
had assured him that the prisoner was merely 
a person of a very dangerous character by 



Q. E. D. 365 

reason of his intriguing spirit, and a 
subject of the Duke of Mantua. He was 
enticed to the frontier, arrested, and kept a 
prisoner, first at Pignerol, and then in the 
Bastille r * 

There, in five lines, Madame Campan has 
given us the entire history, and in terms 
literally and absolutely correct. She does 
not know the name of Mattioli, she is 
writing at a time when no one in France 
knows it, and when there has not been as yet 

* Madame Campan adds: " Such was in fact the real truth about 
the man on whom people have been pleased to fix an iron mask. And 

thus was it related in writing, and published by M , twenty years 

ago. He had searched the depot of foreign affairs, and there he had 
found the truth : he had laid it before the public ; but the public 
prepossessed in favour of a version which attracted them by the mar- 
vellous, would not acknowledge the authenticity of the true account. 
Everyone relied upon the authority of Voltaire : and it is still believed 
that a natural or a twin brother of Louis XIV. lived a number of years 
in prison with a mask over his face. The whimsical story of this mask, 
perhaps, had its origin in the old custom, among both men and women 
in Italy, of wearing a velvet mask when they exposed themselves to the 
sun. It is possible the Italian captive may have shown himself some- 
times upon the terrace of his prison with his face thus covered." 



366 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

a single word about him in connection with 
the mystery of the Mask ; yet the whole 
truth is there. It is Duke Charles's envoy : 
d'Estrades lures him to the frontier : Catinat 
arrests him ; Saint-Mars has him at Pignerol, 
at the Isles, and in the Bastille. It is 
Mattioli's story in a nutshell. Madame 
Campan's sympathy with her subject no- 
where betrays her into loose or inaccurate 
statements ; and had she been inventing in 
this instance it would have been the most 
extraordinary example of invention in all 
literature. * 

With the official documents which bear 



* In the essay in the Revue des Etudes Historiques, June-July, 
1899, in which he substantiates the proofs of M. Funck-Brentano, 
Vicomte Maurice Boutry has produced a confirmatory passage from the 
Souvenirs of the Marquise de Crequy. Summing up a discussion on 
the Iron Mask between Marshal de Noailles, the Duchess de Luynes, 
the Due de Broncas and others, the Marquise adds : " The leading and 
best-informed persons of my time always considered that that famous 
history had no other foundation than the capture and imprisonment of 
the Piedmontese Mattioli. Voltaire's details are the most ridiculous 
fable." Interesting, but of most questionable authenticity. Was 
there ever a Marquise de Crequy ? 



Q. E. D. 367 

them out, these pregnant passages make 
good the case. 

So the task is ended, the burden of the 
mystery rolls off : Mattioli the Italian takes 
the place of that impossible romantic creature 
who has so long usurped it. The historic 
truth of the affair is best, though we lose a 
Prince who never lived. For a tragi-coloured 
myth we exchange a living tragedy ; a tragedy 
prolonged above the ordinary miseries of 
men. The punishment of Mattioli, through 
four - and - twenty years, for a single act 
of treachery, the effect of which was 
transient, takes something from the splen- 
dours of the reign in which it was inflicted. 

With his unfailing sense of dramatic con- 
trast, Topin has noted that at the very hour 
of Mattioli's unheeded death on a pallet in 
the Bastille, Charles of Mantua arrived on a 
visit to Louis XIV. Did Louis, who lavished 
on his guest the riches of the Luxembourg, 



368 THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. 

tell him the fate of his ancient favourite ? 
It would have been heard by Charles as 
carelessly as Louis would have told it. 
Scarce a bowshot from the palace, two turn- 
keys of the Bastille were trailing Mattioli 
in the dusk to a grave in the churchyard of 
St. Paul. 



CONCLUSION. 



By Mr. TIGHE HOPKINS. 

In One vol., Crown 8vo. Price Six Shillings. 

The Silent Gate: 

A Voyage into Prison. 



PRESS NOTICES. 

" Mr. Tighe Hopkins writes so feelingly and so knowingly of prison 
life that we might fancy he had served a term, of penal servitude. 
Certainly we have never had it brought home to us so forcibly as in 
some of these stories that the ways of transgressors are hard when 
they are caught and sentenced. . . . Mr. Hopkins takes a variety 
of types for the subjects that illustrate the system, and his stories 
alternate between tragedy and comedy. . . . The general effect 
is to give an excellent idea of the inner working of prison routine 
and the effects of punishment on different temperaments." — Times. 

" His great strength lies in this — that, though he has taken a 
subject which lends itself to sensational, and even to melodramatic 
treatment, he knows how to be effective without being melodramatic 
or sensational. His book is a set of eleven short stories, all dealing 
with episodes of prison life, and they are done with a pathos that 
is never mawkish or conventional, and a humour that is never, or 
hardly ever, forced. The story called ' Turkey ' is delightful comedy. 
. . . All the stories are written with admirable restraint." — 
Literature. 

"It is to Mr. Hopkins's credit that in his hands prison life is 
interesting in its strangeness and touching in its humanities. He 
knows the' routine, the slang, the habits, the tricks, the punish- 
ments, the darker shades, and brighter gleams of life in Her Majesty's 
prisons. He can gratify the curiosity of the man who rides past 
Newgate every morning on his 'bus, or the railway passenger who 
sees the turrets and low walls of Wormwood Scrubbs turning and 
fading in the dusk. And he can do this without hardness. . . . 
It is unnecessary to say that this book is well written. ' An Idler 
in Old France ' and ' Lady Bonnie's Experiment ' had qualities of 
style which Mr. Hopkins was not likely to lose or carelessly abandon." 
— Academy. 



ii PRESS OPINIONS— continued* 

"A series of sketches of prison life by one who not only knows- 
his subject, but can put his knowledge into effective literary shape. 
Prison life is of necessity a gruesome thing — but the gruesomenes* 
is here diversified with gleams of real humour and pathos." — Saturday 
Review. 

" Mr. Tighe Hopkins has seldom done anything better than this 
volume of prison stories, ' The Silent Gate.' It abounds in curious 
detail, it is neither too sentimental nor too cynical, is redeemed 
by many flashes of humour and many studies of queer characters. 
. . . If 'Benjamin Oudd,' and 'Miss Pocket in B Wing,' and 'Miss 
Cullender's Lamb ' are inventions, they are, at all events, very good 
inventions. Miss Pocket's flirtation with an invisible male prisoner, 
under the incredible difficulties which the rules of Her Majesty's 
Prisons place in the way of such proceedings, is a delightful idea. 
. . . Mr. Hopkins does not ostensibly write with a purpose, yet 
incidentally he brings out the points which a prison reformer 
would insist upon." — Westminster Gazette. 

'* Mr. Tighe Hopkins has long cultivated an elegant taste in dungeons, 
ancient and modern. His tales of old French dungeons are piquant to 
the connoisseur of dark walls and rusty fetters. In ' The Silent Gate r 
he has collected stories of modern English prison-life, and they repro- 
duce the prison atmosphere with such extraordinary fidelity that 
if we did not know Mr. Hopkins's career very well, we should be 
inclined to ask : ' What was he in for ? And how often ? ' These 
stories are all interesting, and some of them are well-nigh perfect both 
in matter and treatment." — Illustrated London News- 

" If the impression left upon the mind by these stories is of the 
sorrow and degradation of prison life, yet they show that through 
this atmosphere of gloom break gleams of humour and of sublime 
heroism. It would be difficult to go beyond the pathos of ' The Release 
of Benjamin Cudd.' The slowly advancing madness of this poor imbecile 
is described with the author's accustomed swiftness and pre- 
cision of touch, which bring out the pity of the tragedy. 
The suddenness and inevitableness of the crisis are finely rendered. 
The humour of ' Miss Pocket in B Wing ' is a delightful break in the 
pervading sorrow. ... A very striking tale, 'Miss Cullender's 
Lamb,' reveals how in the heart of a hardened woman runs a redeem- 
ing streak of sublime devotion. This collection of moving and graphic 
tales brings home to the imagination more forcibly than any treatise 
the perplexities that attend the problem of the treatment of criminals." 
— Daily News. 

"In the present volume 'The Release of Benjamin Cudd' is Mr. 
Hopkins's best study of criminal character. Benjamin, is a real prison 



PRESS OPISlOTSS—contintted. Tij 

type, and may be found by the dozen inside the walls of Her Majesty's 
gaols. . . . Mr. Hopkins is at his best -when describing Benjamins 
feelings in expectation of being called before the visiting justices to be 
sentenced to the 'cat.' Nothing could be better than the account of 
Benjamin's breakdown under punishment, his hallucination, his 
delirium, his final intellectual collapse. Benjamin is a fine study in 
criminal psychology, eminently true to life. We should like Mr. 
Hopkins to give us more work of this kind, and leave ingenious escapes 
to lesser literary lights."— Daily Chronicle. 

" Although Mr. Hopkins writes pleasantly enough to keep the reek 
of the midnight oil from his readers' nostrils, his knowledge of his 
subject is always so large and full that he can only have attained 
to it by long and patient study. In these respects his last volume 
is like those which preceded it, so that ' The Silent Gate ' may 
safely be commended to those who wish to get not only some general 
impression of prison life, but also to become acquainted with certain 
of its sordid details. . . . Mr. Hopkins writes with such con- 
vincing certainty as to his facts that the reader will not hesitate 
to accept him as an authority." — Pall Mall Gazette. 

" Of prison stories there is one all too-familiar type, which tells 
of the blameless convict, the corruptible warder, and the heroic escape. 
' The Silent Gate' is a refreshing change; a collection of excellently 
readable tales of the world inside the ' silent gate', some racy, some 
pathetic. Mr. Hopkins introduces us to types that are new. Some 
of these the system ruins; others, like the delightful 'Turkey,' are 
simply sunny, innocent souls, whom no amount of house-breaking 
could contaminate. . . . But Bone and Miss Pocket are the gems 
of the book." — St. James's Gazette. 

" No writer to-day has an easier narrative style than Mr. Tighe 
Hopkins, or a more agreeably urbane gift of humour. In a book 
about prison life and prisoners there hardly seems to be much scope 
for these accomplishments ; yet in ' The Silent Gate ' Mr. Hopkins 
uses both very pleasantly. The story 'Turkey' is a perfect gem of 
light liandling and whimsical observation." — Daily Mail. 

" In eleven brief and powerful tales in his best style, Mr. Tighe 
Hopkins takes his reader on 'a voyage into prison.' The book will 
be read with real, if melancholy, interest. Mr. Hopkins has made 
a careful study of many of the types of characters to be found within 
the walls of the convict prisons of England, and his darkest pictures in 
these pages are at once vivid and impressive. . . . The tales are 
not all pathetic. There is a fine thread of humour running through 
tbem all, imparting to their touching realism a strong artistic quality. 
The book will interest a large class of readers." — Scotsman. 



iv PRESS OPINIONS— continued. 

" Unusual interest attaches to a collection of stories by Mr. Tighe 
Hopkins, entitled ' The Silent Gate : A Voyage into Prison.' Quitting 
the familiar streets and dungeons of mediaeval France, Mr. Hopkins 
takes us boldly into a modern gaol. ... A series of brilliant 
sketches of the strange types of humanity that gather within "the prison 
walls. Only an expert could pronounce upon the fidelity of such por- 
traiture; all that the reader knows is that a vivid picture is pre- 
sented to his imagination. . . . These remarkable stories will 
certainly startle and arrest." — Manchester Guardian. 

" Many stories of prison life have been written, but few that show 
so intimate a knowledge as the eleven which together make up ' The 
Silent Gate.' ... In each story the crime is but an incident, 
a nothing ; the individual is the centre of interest — the study in 
psychology. So well are they presented that we have a difficulty 
in not believing that the characters are true to life, though ' Miss 
Pocket in B Wing ' is too thorough a romance not to have been helped 
by fiction. . . . Mr. Hopkins writes with so much quiet humour, 
has so delicate a touch upon the sordid side of life, that he makes 
even a prison amusing." — Literary World. 

" A varied assortment of prison stories, some pathetic, some 
humorous; all throbbing with a deep humanity." — Publishers' 
Circular. 

" It is no small tribute to Mr. Hopkins's powers of vivid delineation 
to say that the reading of ' The Silent Gate ' makes one feel quite 
'bad.' It is the next best thing to being 'in' in person. The whole 
scene comes before you. . . . The strange case of Dr. Ashmole, 
the 'last prisoner' in Newgate before its disuse, is of a curiously tragic 
character, although quite within the bounds of possibility ; while the 
' Singular Conduct of C 53 ' owes its interest, we expect, to the clever 
imagination of the author. ... Its humour is not the least attrac- 
tive quality of ' The Silent Gate.' " — Bookseller. 

" ' The Release of Benjamin Cudd,' ' Turkey,' and ' Miss Cullender's 
Lamb' call for special mention." — World- 

" Mr. Tighe Hopkins has hit upon a new idea in his ' Silent Gate.' 
Nobody, so far as I remember, has written an entire book of prison 
stories. Certainly no one has given us such an entirelv fresh incarna- 
tion of criminal life as has Mr. Hopkins in his ' Turkey ' — the boy who 
will make the fortune of 'The Silent Gate.' ... Its success is a 
foregone conclusion." — New York Times. 



BY THE SAME AUTHOR. 



AN IDLER IN OLD FRANCE 

In i vol. Crown Svo, price 6s. 



PRESS NOTICES. 

" ' An Idler in Old France ' is not, as its title might be taken to 
imply, a book of travel. It is a series of pleasant literary rambles 
among the social annals of by-gone France, illustrating such subjects 
as the streets of old Paris, their humours and their abominations, 
the toilets and meals of its inhabitants, French mediaeval inns, sermons, 
apprentices, doctors, and barber-surgeons, the old fashions of la chasse, 
and so forth. Mr. Hopkins writes from the fulness of knowledge and 
draws his pictures with a vivid touch, and yet not without the dis- 
cretion which his subject often demands. Readers who idle with him 
will idle well and find plenty of entertainment." — Times- 

" ' There are many curious and pleasant paths, not over-trodden 
yet in this romantic tract, which might be for another day,' says Mr. 
Hopkins in his preface. The phrase seems to predict a second volume 
— so much the better : to idle in old France with an observer so 
attentive and so vivacious is not to lose one's time." — Saturday 
Review. 

" We have seldom read a more charming book of its kind. The 
author has rambled in the by-ways of old French history, and in a 
series of essays, written in a smooth and picturesque style, has drawn A 
series of graphic pictures of old French life which will be equally 
interesting to the ignorant and the well-informed. They are magazine 
articles of a sort that gets rarer and rarer as the spread of education 
widens the circle of readers. ... No contemporary writer does 
this kind of work better than Mr. Tighe Hopkins." — Literature. 

" . . . You perceive the task which Mr. Hopkins sets him- 
self. He performs it as thoroughly as he dare, and as delicately as 
lie may, and the result is a book of curious interest. . . . Romance 
is for ever there, reality here. To contrast them piquantly has always 
been accounted amusing, and it is often instructive. Here it is both." 
— Academy. 

" Everything is told wittily and well, and Mr. Hopkins manages to 
throw a graceful veil even over repulsive topics." — Bookseller. 



vi PRESS OPINIONS— continued. 

" In these jottings by an idler in old France you have uncovered the 
hidden darkness of a superficially brilliant epoch. The book is full 
of curious documents and strange records, and is unquestionably a 
valuable addition to our knowledge of times and peoples." — Bookman. 

"... The Middle Ages with the gilt off, the romance taken 
away. . . . Mr. Tighe Hopkins's book is full of curious and in- 
teresting things." — Spectator. 

"If Mr. Tighe Hopkins robs the olden time of much of its halo, 
he shows that the new is steadily, if slowly, making for righteousness. 
Mr. Hopkins does not do this purposely. He does not preach, does 
not draw moral lessons of any kind. From his accumulations of old 
French lore he selects the significant facts, and leaves those of his 
readers with a turn for reflection to draw their own conclusions. . . . 
The book abounds in well-selected information, and is a valuable help 
to the understanding of the period of social evolution of which it treats." 
— Daily News. 

" As ' An Idler in Old France,' Mr. Tighe Hopkins elects to explore 
the neglected historical by-ways. He ' idles ' to some purpose when the 
result is these entertaining chapters of social history." — Dundee 
Advertiser. 

"As an appropriate corrective or supplement to the romantic view 
of mediaeval life which leaves out of account everything that is not 
picturesque, we know of nothing better than Mr. Hopkins's essays 
. . . a book which is at once full of information and of entertain- 
ment." — Daihf Chronicle- 

" Mr. Tighe Hopkins has no rival among present-day writers in his 
knowledge of the characteristics of social life in pre-revolutionary 
France." — Daily Mail. 

"A delightful series of essays illustrating the charms and the draw- 
backs of livinsr in a by-gone time." — Critic 

" Most of us would be well content to turn ' idlers ' for the nonce, 
if the results of our idleness were to be as fruitful in interest and 
entertainment as those of Mr. Tighe Hopkins. . . . We are 
tempted to give many extracts from his fascinating volume, but space 
forbids, and we must conclude, only hoping for the speedy realisation 
of the half-promise of the preface to be guided further by the same 
author in these pleasant by-paths of history 'another day.'" — St- 
James's Budget- 

"It is rarely that a volume of historical studies is so interesting." — . 
Globe. 



PEESS OPINIONS— continued. tii 

u In analysing the habits and customs, and extravagance and irre- 
sponsibility of French society in the 17th and 18th centuries, Mr. 
Hopkins contributes a real chapter to a very grim history. . . . 
The toilet, the table, the mediaeval inn, etc., all provide chapters for 
this excellent volume. Mr. Austin Dobson has in many a charming 
essay given us similar, but more softened, pictures of 18th century 
England. In either case, it is real historical work, helping to that 
reconstruction of life and society without which history is but dry 
bones." — Westminster Gazette. 

" A sheaf of picturesque essays. . . . The relations of mediaeval 
masters to their apprentices and work-people is a subject that Mr. 
Hopkins discusses with scholarly care in an essay which is packed with 
quaint information." — Standard. 

" Replete with historical and antiquarian interest. A very acceptable 
companion volume to his work on the old prisons of Paris. Though 
he writes in a style that avoids the remotest suggestion of pedantry, 
Mr. Hopkins proves himself no superficial student." — World. 

" The author of ' The Dungeons of Old Paris ' gives us here another 
collection of interesting details of past French life . . . evidently 
a labour of love, and we gather from the preface that if it finds favour 
he may give us yet more results of his researches into the past. We 
hope it may be so."— Sunday Times- 

" One of the most wholly delightful of recent books." — Sunday Sun, 
"Our Book of the Week." 

" A very interesting and brightly written book." — Literary World. 

" A very entertaining volume." — St. James's Gazette. 

" The • sheaf of papers ' gathered and bound together by ' An Idler 
in Old France ' was worth gleaning. Mr. Tighe Hopkins, however 
sombre his subject, always writes with fascinating freshness and vivid- 
ness. There is not a dull page in his chronicle of old French ways, and 
hardly one in which one may not find some curious, recondite, and 
illuminative piece of information." — Scotsman. 

" Frank and vivid ; careful, curious, and amusing." — New York 
Tribune. 

"A unique book. . . . We have given an idea only of the con- 
tents of this entertaining volume, which has assembled an immense 
mass of facts from a wide range of reading, and arranged them in an 
order that affords a well-proportioned picture of France and the 
French two or three hundred years ago. The like of it we should 
find it hard to name, and we should hardly know where to turn for an 
equal amount of diverting information." — Boston Literary World. 



h 



UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO 
LIBRARY 




Acme Library Card Pocket 

Under Pat. " Ref. Index File." 
Made by LIBRARY BUREAU 


